Malaria
Malaria is a parasitic infection due to protozoa of the genus Plasmodium, transmitted to humans by the bite of
Anopheles mosquitoes. Transmission by transfusion of parasite infected blood and transplacental transmission are
also possible.
5 species of Plasmodium cause malaria in humans: P. falciparum, P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae and P. knowlesi. All
species may cause uncomplicated malaria. Severe malaria (defined by the presence of complications) is almost always
due to P. falciparum. and, less frequently, P. vivax and P. knowlesi.
Uncomplicated malaria can rapidly progress to severe malaria, and severe malaria may cause death within a few hours
if left untreated.
Clinical features
Malaria should always be considered in patients living in or coming from, an endemic area, who presents with fever (or
history of fever in the previous 48 hours).
Uncomplicated malaria
Fever is frequently associated with chills, sweating, headache, muscular ache, malaise, anorexia or nausea. In children,
fever may be associated with abdominal pain, diarrhoea and vomiting. Mild to moderate anaemia is frequent in children
and pregnant women.
Severe malaria
In addition to the above, patients presenting with one or more of the following complications [1] should be hospitalised
immediately:
Impaired consciousness, including coma.
Seizures: more than 2 episodes of generalised or focal (e.g. abnormal eye movements) seizures within 24 hours.
Prostration: extreme weakness; in children: inability to sit or drink/suck.
Respiratory distress: rapid, laboured breathing or slow, deep breathing.
Shock: cold extremities, weak or absent pulse, capillary refill time ≥ 3 seconds, cyanosis.
Jaundice: yellow discolouration of mucosal surfaces of the mouth, conjunctivae and palms.
Haemoglobinuria: dark red urine.
Abnormal bleeding: skin (petechiae), conjunctivae, nose, gums; blood in stools.
Acute renal failure: oliguria (urine output < 12 ml/kg/day in children and < 400 ml/day in adults) despite adequate
hydration.
Laboratory
Parasitological diagnosis [2]
Diagnosis of malaria should be confirmed, whenever possible. If testing is not available, treatment of suspected malaria
should not be delayed.
Rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) a
Rapid tests detect parasite antigens. They give only a qualitative result (positive or negative) and may remain positive
several days or weeks following elimination of parasites.
Page 18 1/ 409