During pregnancy, see Antimalarial treatment in pregnant women.
Pre-referral treatment
If the patient needs to be transferred, administer before transfer:
At community level, for children under 6 years: one dose of rectal artesunate d (10 mg/kg)
Children 2 months to < 3 years (≤ 10 kg): 1 rectal capsule (100 mg)
Children 3 to < 6 years (≤ 20 kg): 2 rectal capsules (200 mg)
or
At dispensary level, for children and adults: the first dose of artesunate or, if unavailable, the first dose of
artemether. For dosing information, see below.
In either case, provide patients, especially children, with some sugar prior to or during transfer.
Inpatient treatment
The drug of choice is artesunate, preferably IV, or if not possible IM.
For patients in shock: IM route is not appropriate, use artesunate IV only.
artesunate slow IV injection (3 to 5 minutes) or, if not possible, slow IM injection, into the anterior thigh:
Children under 20 kg: 3 mg/kg/dose
Children 20 kg and over and adults: 2.4 mg/kg/dose
One dose on admission (H0)
One dose 12 hours after admission (H12)
One dose 24 hours after admission (H24)
Then one dose once daily
Treat parenterally for at least 24 hours (3 doses), then, if the patient can tolerate the oral route, change to a complete
3-day course of an ACT. If not, continue parenteral treatment once daily until the patient can change to oral route
(without exceeding 7 days of parenteral treatment).
If artesunate is not unavailable, artemether may be an alternative:
artemether IM into the anterior thigh (never administer by IV route)
Children and adults: 3.2 mg/kg on admission (D1) then 1.6 mg/kg once daily
Treat parenterally for at least 24 hours (2 doses), then, if the patient can tolerate the oral route, change to a complete
3-day course of an ACT. If not, continue parenteral treatment once daily until the patient can change to oral route
(without exceeding 7 days of parenteral treatment).
Note: if patient is still on parenteral treatment on Day 5, continue on the same treatment until Day 7. In this case it is
not necessary to start an ACT.
Quinine IV is still recommended in some national protocols. It may be used in treatment of malaria with shock if
artesunate IV is not available. The dose is expressed in quinine salt:
Loading dose: 20 mg/kg to be administered over 4 hours, then, keep the vein open with an infusion of 5% glucose
over 4 hours; then
Maintenance dose: 8 hours after the start of the loading dose, 10 mg/kg every 8 hours (alternate quinine over 4
hours and 5% glucose over 4 hours).
For adults, administer each dose of quinine in 250 ml of glucose. For children under 20 kg, administer each dose of
quinine in a volume of 10 ml/kg of glucose.
Do not administer a loading dose to patients who have received oral quinine, or mefloquine within the previous 24
hours: start with maintenance dose.
Treat parenterally for at least 24 hours, then, if the patient can tolerate the oral route, change to a complete 3-day
course of an ACT (or if not available, oral quinine to complete 7 days of quinine treatment). If not, continue parenteral
treatment until the patient can change to oral route (without exceeding 7 days of parenteral treatment).
Page 18 4/ 409