Look first for dehydration (Dehydration, Chapter 1), especially due to inadequate fluid intake or excessive fluid losses
(high fever, vomiting, diarrhoea). Treat dehydration if present. Be aware of the risk of fluid overload and acute
pulmonary oedema. Monitor for the return of urine output.
Acute renal failure (ARF) is found almost exclusively in adults and is more common in Asia than Africa. Insert a urinary
catheter, measure output. Restrict fluids to 1 litre/day (30 ml/kg/day in children), plus additional volume equal to urine
output. Renal dialysis is often necessary.
Antimalarial treatment in pregnant women
Uncomplicated P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae, P. knowlesi malaria
As other patients.
Primaquine should not be given in pregnancy.
Uncomplicated falciparum malaria
All ACT included in the table Treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria can be used in all trimesters.
If ACTs are not available, quinine PO (for dosing, see Treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria)
combined with clindamycin PO if possible (10 mg/kg 2 times daily for 7 days) may be an alternative to ACT.
Primaquine should not be given in pregnancy.
Severe malaria
Artesunate, or if unavailable artemether, is recommended in all trimesters.
Quinine IV is not recommended as standard treatment, however it still remains in some national protocols.
Prevention
For pregnant women in areas with high risk of infection with P. falciparum, refer to the guide Essential obstetric and
newborn care, MSF.
In areas with seasonal malaria transmission (in particular across the Sahel sub-region), seasonal malaria
chemoprevention in children < 5 years reduces mortality: administer amodiaquine + SP at monthly intervals for 4
months during the transmission period [4] .
In malaria endemic areas and in epidemic-prone contexts, all in-patient facilities (including HIV treatment centres
and feeding centres), should be furnished with long-lasting insecticidal nets (LLINs). For more information, refer to
the guide Public health engineering, MSF.
See specialised literature for information regarding anti-vector measures and prevention in travellers.
Footnotes
(a) Most rapid tests detect the following antigens alone or in combination: HRP2 protein specific to P. falciparum; an enzyme
(Pf pLDH) specific to P. falciparum; an enzyme (pan pLDH) common to all 4 plasmodium species. HRP2 may continue to be
detectable for 6 weeks or more after parasite clearance; pLDH remains detectable for several days (up to 2 weeks) after
parasite clearance.
Use pan pLDH tests as first choice in hyper and holo-endemic areas, as well as in areas of intense seasonal transmission and
during outbreaks or complex emergencies. In other contexts, HRP2 tests (P. falciparum > 95%) or HRP2 + pLDH combination
tests (P. falciparum < 95%) are preferred.
(b) If the patient vomits within 30 minutes after administration: re-administer the full dose. If the patient vomits between 30
minutes and 1 hour after administration, re-administer half of the dose. If severe vomiting precludes oral therapy, manage as
severe malaria, see Treatment of severe malaria.
Page 18 6/ 409