Human African trypanosomiasis (sleeping
sickness)
Human African trypanosomiasis (HAT) is a zoonosis caused by protozoa (trypanosomes), transmitted to humans
through the bite of a tsetse fly (Glossina). Transmission by contaminated blood transfusion and transplacental
transmission are also possible.
The disease is found only in sub-Saharan Africa. There are two forms: Trypanosoma brucei gambiense HAT in western
and central Africa and Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense HAT in eastern and southern Africa.
Clinical features
Inoculation may be followed by an immediate local reaction (trypanosomal chancre). This chancre arises in about 50%
of all rhodesiense but rarely in gambiense.
Gambiense HAT
Incubation lasts from a few days to several years.
The first stage (haemolymphatic stage) corresponds to the haematogenous and lymphatic dissemination of the
parasite. Signs include intermittent fever, joint pain, lymphadenopathy (firm, mobile, painless lymph nodes, mainly
cervical), hepatosplenomegaly and skin signs (facial oedema, pruritus).
The second stage (meningoencephalitic stage) corresponds to the invasion of the central nervous system. Signs of
the haemolymphatic stage recede or disappear and varying neurological signs progressively develop: sensory
disturbances (deep hyperaesthesia), psychiatric disorders (apathy or agitation), disturbance of the sleep cycle (with
daytime somnolence alternating with insomnia at night), impaired motor functions (paralysis, seizures, tics) and
neuroendocrine disorders (amenorrhoea, impotence).
In the absence of treatment: cachexia, lethargy, coma and death.
Rhodesiense HAT
The first stage is the same as above, but the incubation period is shorter (< 3 weeks), the disease evolves more rapidly
and symptoms are more severe. Patients often die of myocarditis in 3 to 6 months without having developed signs of
the meningo-encephalitic stage.
In practice, gambiense and rhodesiense HAT can be difficult to differentiate: e.g., there exist cases of acute
gambiense infection and others of chronic rhodesiense infection.
Laboratory
Diagnosis involves 3 steps for gambiense HAT (screening test, diagnostic confirmation and stage determination)
and 2 steps for rhodesiense HAT (diagnostic confirmation and stage determination).
The recommended screening test for T.b. gambiense infection is the CATT (Card Agglutination Test for
Trypanosomiasis). It detects the presence of specific antibodies in the patient’s blood or serum.
Diagnostic confirmation: presence of trypanosomes in lymph node aspirates or in blood using concentration
techniques: capillary tube centrifugation technique (Woo test), quantitative buffy coat (QBC), mini-anion exchange
centrifugation technique (mAEC).
Stage determination: detection of trypanosomes (after centrifugation) and white cell count in the cerebrospinal fluid
(lumbar puncture):
Haemolymphatic stage: no trypanosomes AND ≤ 5 white cells/mm3
Page 18 8/ 409