American trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease)
Chagas disease is a zoonosis caused by the protozoa Trypanosoma cruzi. It is transmitted to humans by contact of
triatomine bug faeces with a break in the skin (often caused by a bite from the triatomine bug), or with mucous
membranes. Transmission by contaminated blood transfusion, accidental exposure to blood, mother-to-child (during
pregnancy or childbirth) or consumption of contaminated food and water is also possible.
Chagas disease has two phases: an acute phase, which lasts approximately 4 to 6 weeks, and a chronic phase, which
is lifelong if left untreated.
The disease is primarily found on the American continent a . It is significantly underdiagnosed. [1]
Clinical features
Acute phase
Most cases are asymptomatic.
If transmitted through a break in the skin: a red swelling on the skin (chagoma) or unilateral painless purplish
periorbital oedema (Romaña's sign) with local lymphadenopathy, headache and fever.
Rarely: multiple lymphadenopathies, hepatosplenomegaly, myocarditis (chest pain, dyspnoea), meningoencephalitis
(seizures, paralysis).
Chronic phase
Many cases remain asymptomatic (indeterminate phase).
Up to 30% of cases develop organ damage: [2]
cardiac lesions (conduction disorders, dilated cardiomyopathy): arrhythmia, dyspnoea, chest pain, heart failure;
gastrointestinal lesions (dilation of the oesophagus or colon i.e. megaoesophagus, megacolon): difficulty
swallowing, severe constipation.
Individuals with immunosuppression have a higher risk of developing organ damage than the general population.
Diagnosis
Laboratory [1]
Acute phase:
Identification of Trypanosoma cruzi by direct microscopy of fresh blood or blood concentrated by
microhematocrit method.
In case of strong clinical suspicion despite no definitive diagnosis from direct microscopy, perform serologic
tests after a delay of approximately 1 month (see "Chronic phase").
Chronic phase:
Identification of anti-Trypanosoma cruzi antibodies by serologic tests, e.g. enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA), hemagglutination inhibition assay (HAI), indirect immunofluorescence (IIF) or rapid diagnostic test (RDT).
For a definitive diagnosis, two different serological tests should be performed simultaneously; in case of
conflicting results, a third test is recommended. b
Other investigations
ECG may demonstrate conduction disorders.
Chest or abdominal x-ray may demonstrate cardiomegaly, megaoesophagus or megacolon.
Treatment
Page 19 1/ 409