Aetiologic treatment
Acute or chronic Chagas disease can be treated with either benznidazole or nifurtimox. However, treatment is not
recommended if patient has already developed cardiac or digestive complications.
Close clinical monitoring should be provided due to the frequent occurrence of adverse effects. Where available,
blood tests (complete blood count, liver and renal function tests) should be performed before, during and after
treatment.
Protocols vary according to the country, follow national recommendations.
For information:
Age Dose and duration
2 to 12 years [3] 5 to 8 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses for 60 days
benznidazole
(a)
PO(
> 12 years and adults [4] 5 to 7 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses for 60 days
≤ 10 years 15 to 20 mg/kg daily in 3 to 4 divided doses for 90 days
nifurtimox
11 to 16 years 12.5 to 15 mg/kg daily in 3 to 4 divided doses for 90 days
PO (b) [3]
≥ 17 years and adults 8 to 10 mg/kg daily in 3 to 4 divided doses for 90 days
(a) Benznidazole is contra-indicated in pregnancy, breastfeeding and in patient with severe hepatic/renal impairment.
(b) Nifurtimox is contra-indicated in pregnancy, breastfeeding, patients with severe hepatic/renal impairment or history of
severe mental disorders or seizures. Adverse effects (gastrointestinal disturbances, agitation, sleeping disorders, seizure)
are frequent and reversible and should not necessarily result in discontinuation of treatment. Avoid alcohol and fatty meals
during treatment.
Symptomatic treatment
See Seizures (Chapter 1), Pain (Chapter 1) and Heart failure (Chapter 12).
Prevention
Individual protection against bite from triatomine bugs: use of long-lasting insecticidal net.
In healthcare settings: standard precautions to avoid contamination with soiled materials or potentially infected
body fluids.
Blood transfusions: advise patients with Chagas disease not to donate blood. In endemic areas, screen donor
blood for Trypanosoma cruzi antibodies.
Footnotes
(a) For more information on geographical distribution of cases of T. cruzi infection:
http://gamapserver.who.int/mapLibrary/Files/Maps/Global_chagas_2009.png
(b) If resources are limited, ELISA alone can be performed. If the result is positive, a second serologic test should then be
performed to confirm the diagnosis before starting treatment.
References
Page 19 2/ 409