Leishmaniases
The leishmaniases are a group of parasitic diseases caused by protozoa of the genus Leishmania, transmitted by the
bite of a sandfly. Over 20 species cause disease in man.
Cutaneous leishmaniasis is endemic in more than 70 countries in South and Central America, Middle East, Central
Asia, and Africa.
Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis occurs in Latin America and, more rarely, in Africa (Ethiopia, Sudan).
Visceral leishmaniasis occurs in more than 60 countries in East and North Africa, South and Central Asia, Southern
Europe, and South and Central America.
Clinical features
Cutaneous and mucocutaneous leishmaniasis
Single or multiple lesions on the uncovered parts of the body: an erythematous papule begins at the sandfly bite,
enlarges to a nodule and extends in surface and depth to form a scabbed ulcer. Ulcers are painless, unless there is
secondary bacterial or fungal infection.
Usually, lesions heal spontaneously, leaving a scar, and result in lifelong protection from disease.
Lesions may also spread to the mucosa (mouth, nose, conjunctiva) giving rise to the mucocutaneous form, which
may cause severe disfigurement.
Visceral leishmaniasis
Visceral leishmaniasis (kala azar) is a systemic disease, resulting in pancytopenia, immunosuppression, and death if left
untreated.
Prolonged (> 2 weeks) irregular fever, splenomegaly, and weight loss are the main signs.
Other signs include: anaemia, diarrhoea, epistaxis, lymphadenopathy, moderate hepatomegaly.
Bacterial diarrhoea, pneumonia, and tuberculosis may develop due to immunosuppression.
Post-kala azar dermal leishmaniasis
Macular, nodular or papular skin rash of unknown aetiology, particularly on the face, and typically occurring after
apparent cure of visceral leishmaniasis.
Laboratory
Cutaneous and mucocutaneous leishmaniasis
Parasitological diagnosis: identification of Giemsa-stained parasites in smears of tissue biopsy from the edge of
the ulcer.
No useful serological tests.
Visceral leishmaniasis
Parasitological diagnosis: identification of Giemsa-stained parasites in smears of splenic, bone marrow, or lymph
node aspiration-biopsy. Splenic aspiration is the most sensitive technique but carries a theoretical risk of potentially
fatal haemorrhage.
Serological diagnosis: rK39 dipstick test and direct agglutination test (DAT) can be used for diagnosis of primary
visceral leishmaniasis in clinically suspect cases. Diagnosis of relapse is only by parasitological confirmation.
Page 19 4/ 409