Treatment
The various species of Leishmania respond differently to drugs. Follow national recommendations.
For information:
Cutaneous and mucocutaneous leishmaniasis
Cutaneous lesions generally heal spontaneously in 3 to 6 months. Treatment is only indicated if lesions are
persistent (> 6 months), disfiguring, ulcerating, or disseminated.
Forms with a single lesion or few lesions: start with local treatment with a pentavalent antimonial: sodium
stibogluconate or meglumine antimoniate, 1 to 2 ml infiltrated into the lesion if it is a nodule and into the edges
and base around the crust if it is an ulcer.
It should be repeated every 3 to 7 days for 2 to 4 weeks. Once healing begins, the treatment can be stopped and
healing will continue.
IM treatment with a pentavalant antimonial (20 mg/kg daily for 10 to 20 days) is restricted to severe cases and must
be administered under close medical supervision.
Miltefosine PO (as for visceral leishmaniasis) for 28 days is effective in many forms of cutaneous leishmaniasis.
Ulcers are often secondarily infected with streptococci and staphylococci: administer suitable antibiotics.
Mucocutaneous forms: as for visceral leishmaniasis.
Visceral leishmaniasis
Visceral leishmaniasis in East Africa
First-line treatment:
a pentavalent antimonial IM or slow IV: 20 mg/kg daily for 17 days
+ paromomycin IM: 15 mg (11 mg base)/kg daily for 17 days
Second-line treatment for relapse and for specific vulnerable groups: severe disease, pregnant women, patients
over 45 years:
liposomal amphotericin B IV infusion: 3 to 5 mg/kg once daily for 6 to 10 days up to a total dose of 30 mg/kg
Treatment in HIV co-infected patients:
liposomal amphotericin B IV infusion: 3 to 5 mg/kg once daily for 6 to 10 days up to a total dose of 30 mg/kg
+ miltefosine PO for 28 days:
Children 2 to 11 years: 2.5 mg/kg once daily
Children ≥ 12 years and < 25 kg: 50 mg once daily
Children ≥ 12 years and adults 25 to 50 kg: 50 mg 2 times daily
Adults > 50 kg: 50 mg 3 times daily
Visceral leishmaniasis in South Asia
First-line treatment:
liposomal amphotericin B IV infusion: 3 to 5 mg/kg once daily for 3 to 5 days up to a total dose of 15 mg/kg
or
liposomal amphotericin B IV infusion: 10 mg/kg single dose
Second-line treatment for relapse:
liposomal amphotericin B IV infusion: 3 to 5 mg/kg once daily for 5 to 8 days up to a total dose of 25 mg/kg
For all patients with visceral leishmaniasis, hydration, nutritional support and treatment of intercurrent infections
(malaria, dysentery, pneumonia, etc.) are essential.
Tuberculosis and/or HIV infection may also be present and should be suspected if relapse occurs more than once or in
the event of treatment failure.
Page 19 5/ 409