Parasites Clinical features/Laboratory Treatment Transmission/Prevention
Cysticercosis Muscular: asymptomatic or Neurological and ocular Transmission by eating
Taenia solium myalgia cysticercosis should be food contaminated with T.
(worldwide) Subcutaneous: nodules managed in specialized solium eggs or auto-
Neurological facilities. infection
(neurocysticercosis): headache, Antiparasitic treatment Prevention:
convulsions, coma, etc. without diagnosis of individual: treat T. solium
Ocular: exophthalmia, location by carriers, hygiene, cook
strabismus, iritis, etc. computerirsed meat thoroughly
Laboratory: hypereosinophilia in tomography and/or
blood and cerebrospinal fluid magnetic resonance
imaging can worsen the
symptoms even threat
the life. Neurosurgical
treatment can be
required.
Hydatid cyst Cysts located in the liver (60% of First-line treatment: Transmission:
Echinococcus cases); lungs (30% of cases), and, surgical excision direct: contact with
granulosus less frequently, in other sites albendazole PO (b) is dogs
(South America, including the brain. useful in addition to, or indirect: water and food
North, East and South Long asymptomatic period. The instead of, surgery: contaminated by dog
Africa, Western cyst becomes symptomatic when Children over 2 years faeces
Europe) complications develop (biliary and adults under 60 kg: Prevention:
obstruction; anaphylactic shock in 7.5 mg/kg 2 times daily individual: avoid contact
the event of rupture into peritoneal Adults over 60 kg: with dogs
cavity, vessels or an organ; febrile 400 mg 2 times daily collective: eliminate
painful jaundice in the event of Treatment duration: stray dogs, monitor
rupture into the biliary tree, etc.). In addition to surgery slaughterhouses
(pre-operatively or
post- operatively):
continuous course of
minimum 2 months or at
least two 28-day
courses with a drug-
free interval of 14 days.
Inoperable cases: 28-
day courses with drug-
free intervals of 14
days, for 3 to 6 months
(on average), possibly
up to 1 year.
(b) Albendazole is contra-indicated during the first trimester of pregnancy.
Page 20 6/ 409