Infection/Epidemiology Clinical features/Diagnosis Treatment
Ascariasis (roundworms)(a) During larval migration albendazole PO single dose
Ascaris lumbricoides Loeffler ’s syndrome: transient pulmonary Children > 6 months and adults:
Distribution: worldwide, symptoms (dry cough, dyspnoea, wheezing) and 400 mg
mainly in tropical and mild fever. (200 mg in children > 6 months
subtropical Once adult worms are present in the intestine but < 10 kg)
Transmission: ingestion of Abdominal pain and distension. In general, the or
ascaris eggs diagnosis is made when adult worms are mebendazole PO for 3 days
expelled from the anus (or occasionally from the Children > 6 months and adults:
mouth). Ascaris are large (15-30 cm), cylindrical 100 mg 2 times daily
worms, pinkish-white, with slightly tapered ends. (50 mg 2 times daily in children
Complications > 6 months but < 10 kg)
Ascariasis is usually benign, but massive
infestation may cause intestinal obstruction
(abdominal pain, vomiting, constipation),
especially in children < 5 years. Worms may
accidentally migrate to gall bladder, liver or
peritoneum, causing jaundice, liver abscess, or
peritonitis.
Ascaris eggs may be detected through
parasitological examination of stools.
Trichuriasis (whipworms)(a) In heavy infection: abdominal pain and diarrhoea. albendazole PO for 3 days
Trichuris trichiura In massive infection: chronic bloody diarrhea, Children > 6 months and adults:
Distribution and tenesmus, rectal prolapse due to frequent 400 mg once daily
transmission: attempts to defecate, especially in children. (200 mg once daily in children >
as for A. lumbricoides Worms may sometimes be seen on the rectal 6 months but < 10 kg)
mucosa when prolapsed: these are grayish- or
white, 3-5 cm in length, in the shape of a whip, mebendazole PO for 3 days,
with a thickened body and a long, threadlike as for ascariasis.
extremity. A single dose of albendazole
Trichuris eggs may be detected through or mebendazole is often
parasitological examination of stools. insufficient.
Ankylostomiase(a) During larval penetration/migration albendazole single dose (as
Ancylostoma duodenale Cutaneous signs (pruritic papulo-vesicular rash for ascariasis) is much more
Necator americanus at the site of penetration, usually the feet) and effective than mebendazole
Distribution: tropical and pulmonary symptoms (similar to ascariasis). single dose.
subtropical regions Once adult worms are present in the intestine When using mebendazole, a 3-
Transmission: larval skin Mild abdominal pain. Attachment of the parasite day treatment (as for
penetration following to the mucosa leads to chronic blood loss and ascariasis) is recommended.
contact (feet, hands) with anaemia (in endemic areas, antihelminthic Treatment of anaemia
contaminated soil treatment is recommended for patients with (Chapter 1).
iron-deficiency anaemia).
Hookworm eggs may be detected through
parasitological examination of stools.
Strongyloidiasis Acute strongyloidiasis First line treatment is:
Page 20 8/ 409