Strongyloides stercoralis During larval penetration/migration: ivermectin PO(b) single dose
Distribution: humid tropical cutaneous signs (erythema and pruritus at the Children > 15 kg and adults:
regions site of penetration, which may persist several 200 micrograms/kg, on an
Transmission: larval skin weeks) and pulmonary symptoms (similar to empty stomach
penetration and auto- ascariasis). While less effective, a 3-day
infection Once larvae are present in the intestine: treatment with albendazole
gastrointestinal symptoms (bloating, PO (as for trichuriasis) may be
abdominal and epigastric pain, vomiting, an alternative.
diarrhoea). Hyperinfections are refractory
Chronic strongyloidiasis to conventional therapy.
Intestinal larvae may re-infect their host (auto- Prolonged or intermittent
infection) by penetrating through the intestinal multiple-dose regimens are
wall or by migrating transcutaneously from required.
perianal skin. Chronic infections result in
prolonged or recurrent pulmonary and
gastrointestinal symptoms. Transcutaneous
migration of intestinal larvae gives rise to a
typical rash (larva currens), mainly in the anal
region and on the trunk: sinuous, raised, linear,
migrating lesion, intensely pruritic, moving rapidly
(5 to 10 cm/hour) and lasting several hours or
days.
Complications
Hyperinfection (massive infestation) results in
exacerbation of pulmonary and gastrointestinal
symptoms, and possible dissemination of larvae
to atypical locations, (CNS, heart, etc.). This
form occurs mainly in patients receiving
immunosuppressive therapy (e.g.
corticosteroids).
Strongyloides larvae may be detected through
parasitological examination of stools.
Enterobiasis (pinworms) Anal pruritus, more intense at night, vulvovaginitis albendazole PO single dose,
Enterobius vermicularis in girls (rare). In practice, the diagnosis is most as for ascariasis
Distribution: worldwide often made when worms are seen on the or
Transmission: faecal-oral perianal skin (or in the stool in heavy infestation). mebendazole PO single dose
route or auto-infection Pinworms are small (1 cm), mobile, white, Children > 6 months and adults:
cylindrical worms with slightly tapered ends. 100 mg
Pinworm eggs may be collected from the anal (50 mg in children > 6 months
area (scotch tape method) and detected under but < 10 kg)
the microscope. A second dose may be given
after 2 to 4 weeks.
Trichinellosis Enteric phase (1 to 2 days after ingestion of albendazole PO for 10 to 15
Trichinella sp infected meat) days
Distribution: worldwide, Self-limited episode of diarrhoea and abdominal Children > 2 years:
particularly frequent in Asia pain lasting several days. 5 mg/kg 2 times daily
(Thailand, Laos, China, etc.) Adults:
Page 20 9/ 409