Lymphatic filariasis (LF)
The distribution of LF is linked to that of its mosquito vectors (Anopheles, Culex, Aedes, etc.):
W. bancrofti: sub-Saharan Africa, Madagascar, Egypt, India, South East Asia, Pacific region, South America, The
Caribbean
B. malayi: South East Asia, China, India, Sri Lanka
B. timori: Timor
90% of LF is due to W. bancrofti and 10% to Brugia spp.
Clinical features
Acute recurrent inflammatory manifestations
Adenolymphangitis: lymph node(s) and red, warm, tender oedema along the length of a lymphatic channel, with or
without systemic signs (e.g. fever, nausea, vomiting). The inflammation may involve the lower limbs, external
genitalia and breast.
In men: acute inflammation of the spermatic cord (funiculitis), epididymis and testicle (epididymo-orchitis).
Attacks resolve spontaneously within a week and recur regularly in patients with chronic disease.
Chronic manifestations
Lymphoedema: oedema of the lower extremity or external genitalia or breast, secondary to obstruction of the
lymphatics by macrofilariae. The oedema is reversible initially but then becomes chronic and increasingly severe:
hypertrophy of the area affected, progressive thickening of the skin (fibrous thickening with formation of
creases, initially superficial, but then deep, and verrucous lesions). The final stage of lymphoedema is
elephantiasis.
In men: increase in volume of fluid due to accumulation within the tunica vaginalis (hydrocoele, lymphocoele,
chylocoele); chronic epididymo-orchitis.
Chyluria: milky or rice-water urine (disruption of a lymphatic vessel in the urinary tract).
In patients parasitized by Brugia spp, genital lesions and chyluria are rare: lymphoedema is usually confined to
below the knee.
Laboratory
Detection of microfilariae in the peripheral blood (thick film) a ; blood specimens should be collected between 9 pm
and 3 am.
In regions where loiasis and/or onchocerciasis are co-endemic, check for co-infection if the LF diagnosis is
positive.
Treatment
Antiparasitic treatment
Treatment is not administered during an acute attack.
Doxycycline PO, when administered as a prolonged treatment, eliminates the majority of macrofilariae and reduces
lymphoedema: 200 mg once daily for 4 weeks minimum. It is contraindicated in children < 8 years and pregnant or
breast-feeding women.
Diethylcarbamazine PO single dose (400 mg in adults; 3 mg/kg in children) may be an alternative but eliminates a
variable proportion of adult worms (up to 40%) and does not relieve symptoms; a prolonged treatment is no more
effective than single dose therapy. In addition, DEC is contra-indicated in patients with onchocerciasis or Loa
loa microfilarial load > 2000 mf/ml and in pregnant and breast-feeding women.
Page 21 6/ 409