Febrile seizures frequently occur in children aged 6 months to 5 years with fever (usually due to viral infection) and no
signs of central nervous system (CNS) infection, metabolic disturbances, or history of afebrile seizures [4] . They may be
either "simple" or "complex".
A simple febrile seizure is defined as a single generalised seizure, without focal signs, that lasts less than 15 minutes,
and does not recur within a 24-hour period [4] . Most of these seizures last less than 5 minutes and if so,
no antiseizure treatment is required. The risk of subsequent epilepsy is low after this type of seizure. Observe the
child at least until full recovery, and discharge when child returns to neurological baseline. Give instructions for
home-based management: symptomatic treatment of fever to make the child more comfortable (see Fever,
Chapter 1) and of underlying viral infection if relevant.
A complex febrile seizure is a seizure meeting at least one the following criteria: presence of focal signs, a duration
more than 15 minutes, or multiple seizures within a 24-hour period [4] .
In all cases:
Provide first aid during a seizure.
After a seizure, see Postictal management.
If a seizure lasts more than 5 minutes or recurs within 5 minutes, start treatment for status epilepticus.
Status epilepticus
In case of status epilepticus, start antiseizure medication (ASM).
ASMs may cause respiratory depression, bradycardia, and hypotension, especially in children
and older patients.
During and after ASM administration:
have ventilation equipment (Ambu and mask) and solutions for fluid replacement ready for use,
monitor RR, SpO , HR, and BP at least every 15 minutes until stable.
2
Never administer ASMs by rapid IV injection. Reduce the administration rate in the event of drop in RR,
HR, or BP.
Step 1 - First-line ASM treatment
Administer one of the following benzodiazepines (BZD). The choice depends on the situation, i.e. if seizures occur
in pre-hospital or hospital setting.
In any case, do not administer more than 2 doses of BZD.
Status epilepticus in pre-hospital setting
Administer midazolam (5 mg/ml solution) by buccal or intranasal route or diazepam (5 mg/ml solution) by rectal
route. For doses to be administered, see Table 1.
If seizures do not stop 5 minutes after the first dose of BZD, readminister the same dose.
If seizures do not stop after the second dose of BZD, refer urgently to hospital for treatment with second-line
ASM(s).
If seizures stop after 1 or 2 doses of BZD, refer to hospital for further management (aetiologic treatment and
potential maintenance treatment).
While awaiting transfer, monitor vital signs, administer oxygen if available to maintain SpO > 94%. If seizures stop,
2
see Postictal management.
Status epilepticus in hospital setting
Page 23 / 409