(d) In patients ≥ 65 years: for diazepam rectal, do not exceed 2 ml (= 10 mg) per dose; for diazepam IV, reduce the dose by half
(1 ml = 5 mg per dose).
Step 2 - Second-line ASM treatment
Patients with no known epilepsy
Second-line ASMs are indicated for:
Children, if seizures do not stop within 5 minutes of second dose of BZD.
All adults, even if seizures stop after 1 or 2 doses of BZD, unless a reversible cause of seizure can be quickly
treated (e.g. hypoglycaemia, electrolyte disturbances).
The choice of the ASM depends on the patient’s characteristics: age, sex, pregnancy or breastfeeding status, and
comorbidities. See Table 2.
For doses to be administered, see Table 3
Table 2 - Choice of a second-line antiseizure medication
Children 1 month to < 2 years Girls 2 to < 10 years
Girls ≥ 10 years and women Boys ≥ 2 years and men
First choice levetiracetam (LEV) (e) levetiracetam (LEV) (e) or
valproic acid (VPA) (f)
Second choice phenobarbital (PB) (g) phenobarbital (PB) (g)
Third choice phenytoin (PHT) (h) phenytoin (PHT) (h)
(e) LEV can be used in all patients but with caution in patients with renal impairment or heart disorders.
(f) VPA is contraindicated:
• in children under 2 years and patients with hepatic disease;
• in women and girls who are or may become pregnant. Every effort should be made to find a safer alternative to VPA in
pregnant women and girls. However, prolonged status epilepticus is a life-threatening condition both for the mother and
the unborn child. If VPA is the only ASM available, use the lowest possible dose.
(g) PB is contraindicated in patients with severe impairment of respiratory, renal or hepatic function. It should be administered
with caution in children, older patients and patients with mild to moderate impairment of respiratory, renal or hepatic
function.
(h) PHT is contraindicated in patients with bradycardia, atrioventricular block. It should be administered with caution in
patients with hepatic impairment, heart failure, cardiac rhythm disorders, hypotension.
If seizures do not stop after second-line ASM, change to another second-line ASM.
If seizures do not stop or recur in < 6 hours despite 2 second-line ASMs, transfer the patient to an intensive care
unit for treatment of refractory status epilepticus.
If seizures stop after 1 or 2 second-line ASM(s), see Postictal management and Maintenance ASM treatment.
Patients with known epilepsy
History taking:
ASM and dose taken, effectiveness.
Missed doses if any, and reason (e.g. forgetting, interruption due to adverse effects, shortage of medication).
Management:
Administer the IV loading dose of the medication that the patient should usually take or see Table 2.
Page 25 / 409