If seizures do not stop, continue treatment as for patients with no known epilepsy.
If seizures stop after 1 or 2 second-line ASM(s), see Postictal management and Maintenance ASM treatment.
Step 3 - Maintenance ASM treatment
Some patients may require maintenance treatment after the loading dose.
In children, maintenance treatment is indicated when:
a second-line ASM has been used to control seizures, unless a reversible cause of seizure can be quickly
treated (e.g. hypoglycaemia, electrolyte disturbances),
3 or more seizures occur within a 24-hour period,
focal signs and/or impaired consciousness persist beyond expected postictal period,
there is known or presumed traumatic brain injury (within 24 hours of injury),
there is known or presumed epilepsy.
Unless the child has already received a loading dose, start with a loading dose, see Table 3.
In adults, maintenance treatment is indicated for all patients, unless a reversible cause of seizure can be quickly
treated (e.g. hypoglycaemia, electrolyte disturbances).
If seizures do not recur, administer maintenance treatment for 48 to 72 hours and then reassess. Use oral route (or
nasogastric tube). For maintenance doses to be administered, see Table 3.
For seizures in the context of head trauma, maintenance treatment should last 7 days.
In case of epilepsy, start or resume long-term treatment. See Epilepsy, Chapter 12.
Postictal management
Note time of end of seizure; keep patient in recovery position; maintain airway.
Administer oxygen to all patients if available and especially to patients who received ASM(s). Maintain SpO > 94%.
2
Monitor vital signs and SpO every 15 minutes until stable, then every hour.
2
Closely monitor RR if the patient received BZD, PB or PHT; HR and BP (and ECG if available) if the patient
received PHT.
Observe for further seizures.
As soon as possible, try to identify the underlying cause and treat it, even in patients with known epilepsy (see
Frequent causes of seizures):
Take a detailed history and perform a full clinical examination, looking particularly for general status and focal
signs.
Depending on assessment, perform the following tests if available:
capillary blood glucose, especially if not done during the seizure. Check regularly blood glucose if necessary.
rapid diagnostic test for malaria in endemic areas
CSF examination (lumbar puncture) and culture
white blood cell count, serum electrolytes and creatinine, liver enzymes and coagulation tests, blood culture
Note if patient does not return to baseline status within 30 to 60 minutes of end of seizure.
Frequent causes of seizures
Febrile seizures: in young children with fever, usually in a context of a respiratory or gastrointestinal viral infection.
CNS infections: e.g. any meningitis (for Bacterial meningitis, see Chapter 7); severe malaria, neurocysticercosis,
trypanosomiasis (see Chapter 6); cerebral toxoplasmosis, cryptococcal meningitis (see HIV infection and AIDS,
Chapter 8).
Metabolic abnormalities: e.g. hypoglycaemia (Chapter 1), electrolyte disorders (hyponatremia, hypocalcaemia).
Intoxications: e.g. psychoactive drugs and alcohol, methanol, medications, neurotoxic pesticides and venoms,
carbon monoxide.
Page 26 / 409