Gastric and duodenal ulcers in adults
Clinical features
Burning epigastric pain or epigastric cramps between meals, that wake the patient at night. Recurrent episodes
characteristically last a few days and are often accompanied by nausea and even vomiting.
The most common complications are perforation and bleeding.
Treatment of non-complicated ulcers
For an isolated episode:
identify patients taking NSAID or acetylsalicylic acid; stop treatment;
encourage patients to avoid alcohol and tobacco use;
omeprazole PO: 20 mg once daily in the morning for 7 to 10 days. In severe or recurrent cases, dose can be
increased to 40 mg once daily and the treatment can be prolonged for up to 8 weeks.
If the patient has frequent recurrences unrelated to NSAID use, that require repeated treatment with antiulcer drugs:
see eradication of Helicobacter pylori.
Treatment of complicated ulcers
Perforation
Perforation should be considered in patients presenting with sudden onset intense epigastric pain, particularly if there is
rigidity of the abdominal wall. The risk of peritonitis is increased if the perforation occurs on a full stomach.
To start:
place the patient on a strict fast (NPO); insert a nasogastric tube and aspirate if possible;
insert an intravenous line and hydrate (Ringer lactate);
treat acute pain (see Pain, Chapter 1);
omeprazole IV infusion: 40 mg once daily over 20 to 30 minutes
Refer to a surgeon.
If referral not possible, risk of mortality is high:
Continue conservative management including maintenance fluid (alternate 5% glucose and Ringer lactate).
Start IV antibiotics (see Shock, Chapter 1).
If after 3 days, the patient's clinical condition has improved, cautiously restart oral feeding, remove the
nasogastric tube and start PO treatment to eradicate Helicobacter pylori (see eradication of Helicobacter
pylori).
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Passing of black stool (maelena) and/or vomiting blood (haematemesis). In 80% of cases the bleeding stops
spontaneously.
Insert a nasogastric tube for aspiration and insert an IV line (16G).
If the haemodynamic state is stable (pulse and blood pressure are normal):
Hydrate (Ringer lactate), monitor, keep NPO for 12 hours.
If there is no active haemorrhage, restart oral feeding after 12 hours.
Gastric lavage with cold water is not essential, but may help evaluate persistence of bleeding.
If the haemorrhage continues (haematemesis) and/or if the haemodynamic state deteriorates (pulse increases, BP
drops):
Page 12 2/ 409