• Add a laxative if treatment >
48 hours.
morphine PO The daily dose is The daily dose is • Do not initiate treatment with
sustained determined during the determined during the initial the MSR in elderly patients and
release (MSR) initial treatment with treatment with immediate patients with renal or hepatic
immediate release release morphine (MIR). impairment. Begin treatment
morphine (MIR). If treatment is initiated with MIR.
If treatment is initiated directly with MSR: • Add a laxative if treatment >
directly with MSR: 30 mg every 12 hours, to 48 hours.
> 6 months: 0.5 mg/kg be ajusted in relation to
every 12 hours, to be pain intensity
ajusted in relation to pain
intensity
morphine SC, > 6 months: 0.1 to 0.2 0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg every 4 • Reduce doses by half and
IM mg/kg every 4 hours hours administer less frequently,
according to clinical response, in
elderly patients and patients
morphine IV > 6 months: 0.1 mg/kg 0.1 mg/kg administered in
administered in fractionated doses (0.05
with severe renal or hepatic
fractionated doses (0.05 mg/kg every 10 minutes)
impairment.
mg/kg every 10 minutes) every 4 hours if necessary
• Add a laxative if treatment >
every 4 hours if necessary
48 hours.
Notes on the use of morphine and derivatives:
Morphine is an effective treatment for many types of severe pain. Its analgesic effect is dosedependent. Its
adverse effects have often been exaggerated and should not be an obstacle to its use.
The most serious adverse effect of morphine is respiratory depression, which may be fatal. This adverse effect
results from overdose. It is, therefore, important to increase doses gradually. Respiratory depression is preceded by
drowsiness, which is a warning to monitor respiratory rate (RR).
The RR should remain equal to or greater than the thresholds indicated below:
Children 1 to 12 months RR ≥ 25 respirations/minute
Children 1 to 2 years RR ≥ 20 respirations/minute
Children 2 to 5 years RR ≥ 15 respirations/minute
Children > 5 years and adults RR ≥ 10 respirations/minute
Respiratory depression must be identified and treated quickly: verbal and physical stimulation of the patient;
administration of oxygen; respiratory support (bag and mask) if necessary. If no improvement, administer naloxone
(antagonist of morphine) in bolus to be repeated every minute until RR normalises and the excessive drowsiness
resolves: 5 micrograms/kg in children and 1 to 3 micrograms/kg in adults.
Morphine and codeine always cause constipation. A laxative should be prescribed if the opioid treatment continues
more than 48 hours. Lactulose PO is the drug of choice: children < 1 year: 5 ml daily; children 1-6 years: 5 to 10 ml
daily; children 7-14 years: 10 to 15 ml daily; adults: 15 to 45 ml daily.
Page 42 / 409