If the patient’s stools are soft, a stimulant laxative (bisacodyl PO: children > 3 years: 5 to 10 mg once daily; adults:
10 to 15 mg once daily) is preferred.
Nausea and vomiting are common at the beginning of treatment.
Children:
ondansetron PO: 0.15 mg/kg (max. 4 mg per dose) up to 3 times daily
Do not use metoclopramide in children.
Adults:
haloperidol PO (2 mg/ml oral solution): 1 to 2 mg up to 6 times daily or metoclopramide PO: 5 to 10 mg 3 times
daily with an interval of at least 6 hours between each dose
Do not combine haloperidol and metoclopramide.
For chronic pain in late stage disease (cancer, AIDS etc.), morphine PO is the drug of choice. It may be necessary to
increase doses over time according to pain assessment. Do not hesitate to give sufficient and effective doses.
Morphine, tramadol and codeine have similar modes of action and should not be combined.
Buprenorphine, nalbuphine and pentazocine must not be combined with morphine, pethidine, tramadol or codeine
because they have competitive action.
Treatment of nociceptive pain in pregnant and breast-feeding women
Pregnancy
Breast-feeding
Analgesics 0-5 From 6th month
months
paracetamol first first choice first choice
Level choice
1
aspirin avoid contra-indicated avoid
ibuprofen avoid contra-indicated possible
codeine possible The neonate may develop withdrawal Use with caution, for a short period
symptoms, respiratory depression and (2-3 days), at the lowest effective
drowsiness in the event of prolonged dose. Monitor the mother and the
Level administration of large doses at the child: in the event of excessive
2 end of the thirdtrimester. Closely drowsiness, stop treatment.
monitor the neonate.
tramadol possible The child may develop drowsiness when the mother receives tramadol at the
end of the thirdtrimester and during breast-feeding. Administer with caution, for
a short period, at the lowest effective dose, and monitor the child.
morphine possible The child may develop withdrawal symptoms, respiratory depression and
Level drowsiness when the mother receives morphine at the end of the third trimester
3 and during breast-feeding.
Administer with caution, for a short period, at the lowest effective dose, and
monitor the child.
Neuropathic pain
Page 43 / 409