Dehydration
Dehydration results from excessive loss of water and electrolytes from the body. If prolonged, dehydration can
compromise organ perfusion, resulting in shock.
It is principally caused by diarrhoea, vomiting and severe burns.
Children are particularly susceptible to dehydration due to frequent episodes of gastroenteritis, high surface area to
volume ratio and inability to fully communicate, or independently meet their fluid needs.
The protocols below are focused on treatment of dehydration caused by diarrhoea and vomiting. Alternative treatment
protocols should be used for children with malnutrition (see Severe acute malnutrition, Chapter 1) or in patients with
severe burns (see Burns, Chapter 10).
Clinical features and assessment
History of diarrhoea and/or vomiting and concomitant reduced urine output.
Clinical features depend on the degree of dehydration (see table below). Features such as dry mouth, absence of
tears may also be noted.
Patients with severe dehydration should be assessed for shock (tachycardia, low blood pressure and delayed
capillary refill time etc.).
Electrolyte disorders may cause tachypnoea, muscle cramps or weakness, cardiac arrhythmia (irregular heart rate,
palpitation), confusion and/or seizures.
Classification of degree of dehydration (adapted from the WHO) [1] [2]
Severe dehydration Some dehydration No dehydration
At least 2 of the At least 2 No signs of "severe"
following signs: of the following signs: or "some" dehydration.
Lethargic or
Mental status Restless or irritable Normal
unconscious
Radial pulse Weak or absent Palpable Easily palpable
Eyes (a) Sunken Sunken Normal
Goes back very slowly Goes back slowly Goes back quickly
Skin pinch (b)
(> 2 seconds) (< 2 seconds) (< 1 second)
Drinks poorly Thirst, No thirst,
Thirst
or not able to drink drinks quickly drinks normally
(a) Sunken eyes may be a normal feature in some children. Ask the mother if the child's eyes are the same as usual or if they are
more sunken than usual.
(b) Skin pinch is assessed by pinching the skin of the abdomen between the thumb and forefinger without twisting. In older
people this sign is not reliable as normal aging diminishes skin elasticity.
Treatment of dehydration
Page 51 / 409