Severe dehydration
Treat shock if present (see Shock, Chapter 1).
If able to drink, administer oral rehydration solution (ORS) PO whilst obtaining IV access.
according to WHO Treatment Plan C, monitoring infusion rate closely:
Insert peripheral IV line using large caliber catheter (22-24G in children or 18G in adults) or intraosseous needle.
Administer Ringer lactate (RL) a
WHO Treatment Plan C [1] [2]
Age First, give 30 ml/kg over (c) : Then, give 70 ml/kg over:
Children < 1 year 1 hour 5 hours
Children ≥ 1 year and adults 30 minutes 2 ½ hours
(c) Repeat once if radial pulse remains weak or absent after first bolus.
In case of suspected severe anaemia, measure haemoglobin and treat accordingly (see Anaemia, Chapter 1). b
As soon as the patient is able to drink safely (often within 2 hours), provide ORS as the patient tolerates. ORS
contains glucose and electrolytes which prevent development of complications.
Monitor ongoing losses closely. Assess clinical condition and degree of dehydration at regular intervals to ensure
continuation of appropriate treatment.
If over the course of treatment the patient:
remains or becomes lethargic: measure blood glucose level and/or treat hypoglycaemia (see Hypoglycaemia,
Chapter 1).
develops muscle cramps/weakness and abdominal distention: treat for moderate hypokalaemia with 7.5%
potassium chloride syrup (1 mmol of K+/ml) PO for 2 days:
Children under 45 kg: 2 mmol/kg (2 ml/kg) daily (according to weight, the daily dose is divided into 2 or 3 doses)
Children 45 kg and over and adults: 30 mmol (30 ml) 3 times daily
This treatment should only be given as an inpatient c .
develops peri-orbital or peripheral oedema: reduce the infusion rate to a minimum, auscultate the lungs, re-
evaluate the stage of dehydration and the necessity of continuing IV rehydration. If IV rehydration is still required,
continue the infusion at a slower rate and observe the patient closely. If IV rehydration is no longer required,
change to oral treatment with ORS.
develops dyspnoea, cough and bibasal crepitations are heard on auscultation of the lungs: sit the patient up,
reduce the infusion rate to a minimum and administer one dose of furosemide IV (1 mg/kg in children; 40 mg in
adults). Monitor the patient closely over 30 minutes and assess for underlying cardiorespiratory or renal disease.
Once the patient is stabilised, reassess the degree of dehydration and the necessity of continuing IV rehydration.
If IV rehydration is still required, re-start at half the previous infusion rate and monitor closely. If IV rehydration is
no longer required, change to oral treatment with ORS.
Some dehydration
Administer ORS according to WHO Treatment Plan B which equates to 75 ml/kg ORS given over 4 hours.
WHO Treatment Plan B [1] d
Page 52 / 409