Severe acute malnutrition
Last updated: February 2024
Severe acute malnutrition (SAM) results from insufficient energy (kilocalories), fat, protein and/or other nutrients
(vitamins and minerals, etc.) to cover individual needs.
SAM is frequently associated with medical complications due to metabolic disturbances and compromised immunity. It
is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in children globally.
The protocols below are focused on the diagnosis and management of SAM in children 6 to 59 months only. For
further details regarding this age group, and guidance for other age groups, refer to national recommendations and/or
specialised protocols.
Clinical assessment
Characteristic physical signs
In marasmus: skeletal appearance resulting from significant loss of muscle mass and subcutaneous fat.
In kwashiorkor:
Bilateral oedema of the lower limbs sometimes extending to other parts of the body (e.g. arms and hands, face).
Discoloured, brittle hair; shiny skin which may crack, weep, and become infected.
Diagnostic and admission criteria
Diagnostic criteria for SAM are both anthropometric and clinical:
Mid-upper arm circumference (MUAC) a measures the degree of muscle wasting. MUAC < 115 mm indicates
SAM and significant mortality risk.
Weight-for-height z-score (WHZ) indicates the degree of weight loss by comparing the weight of the child with the
median weight of non-malnourished children of the same height and sex. SAM is defined as WHZ < –3 with
reference to the WHO Child Growth Standards b .
The presence of bilateral pitting oedema of the lower limbs (when other causes of oedema have been ruled out)
indicates SAM, regardless of MUAC and WHZ.
Admission criteria for SAM treatment programmes vary with context. Refer to national recommendations.
Medical complications
Children with any of the following severe medical conditions should receive hospital-based medical management:
Pitting oedema extending from the lower limbs up to the face;
Anorexia (observed during appetite test);
Other severe complications: persistent vomiting, shock, altered mental status, seizures, severe anaemia
(clinically suspected or confirmed), persistent hypoglycaemia, eye lesions due to vitamin A deficiency, frequent
or abundant diarrhoea, dysentery, dehydration, severe malaria, pneumonia, meningitis, sepsis, severe cutaneous
infection, fever of unknown origin, etc.
In the absence of these conditions, children should be treated as outpatients with regular follow-up.
Nutritional treatment
All children with SAM should receive nutritional treatment.
Page 55 / 409