Nutritional treatment is based on the use of specialised nutritious foods enriched with vitamins and minerals: F-75
and F-100 therapeutic milks, and ready-to-use therapeutic food (RUTF).
Nutritional treatment is organised into phases:
Phase 1 (inpatient) intends to restore metabolic functions and treat or stabilize medical complications. Children
receive F-75 therapeutic milk. This phase may last 1 to 7 days, after which children usually enter transition
phase. Children with medical complications generally begin with phase 1.
Transition phase (inpatient) intends to ensure tolerance of increased food intake and continued improvement of
clinical condition. Children receive F-100 therapeutic milk and/or RUTF. This phase usually lasts 1 to 3 days, after
which children enter phase 2.
Phase 2 (outpatient or inpatient) intends to promote rapid weight gain and catch-up growth. Children receive
RUTF. This phase usually lasts 1 to 3 days when inpatient, after which children are discharged for outpatient
care. Children without medical complications enter directly into this phase as outpatients. The outpatient
component usually lasts several weeks.
Breastfeeding should be continued in breastfed children.
Drinking water should be given in addition to meals, especially if the ambient temperature is high, or the child has a
fever or is receiving RUTF.
Routine medical management
The following should be provided to all inpatients and outpatients with SAM:
Antibiotic From D1, unless specific signs of infection are present:
treatment amoxicillin PO: 50 mg/kg (max. 1 g) 2 times daily for 5 to 7 days
Malaria On D1, rapid diagnostic test in endemic areas and treatment for malaria according to results or if
testing is not available (see Malaria, Chapter 6).
Intestinal In transition phase or upon outpatient admission, albendazole PO:
parasites Children 12 to 23 months: 200 mg single dose
Children 24 months and over: 400 mg single dose
Vaccination In transition phase or upon outpatient admission, measles vaccine for children 6 months to 5
years, unless a document shows that the child received 2 doses of vaccine administered as
follows: one dose at or after 9 months and one dose at least 4 weeks after the first dose.
Children vaccinated between 6 and 8 months should be re-vaccinated as above (i.e. with 2
doses) once they reach 9 months of age, provided that an interval of 4 weeks from the first dose
is respected.
Other vaccines included in the EPI: check vaccination status and refer the child to vaccination
services at discharge.
Tuberculosis At D1 then regularly during treatment, screen for TB. For a child screening positive, perform
(TB) complete diagnostic evaluation.
For more information, refer to the guide Tuberculosis, MSF.
HIV infection Perform HIV counselling and testing (unless the mother explicitly declines testing).
Children under 18 months: test the mother with rapid diagnostic tests. For a mother testing
positive, request PCR test for the child.
Children 18 months and over: test the child with rapid diagnostic tests.
Page 56 / 409