Management of complications
Infections
Respiratory, cutaneous and urinary infections are common. However, classic signs of infection, such as fever, may
be absent [1] .
Severe infection or sepsis should be suspected in children that are lethargic or apathetic or suffering from an acute
complication such as hypothermia, hypoglycaemia, seizures, difficulty breathing, or shock. Immediately
administer ampicillin IV 50 mg/kg every 8 hours + gentamicin IV 7.5 mg/kg once daily. Continue this treatment
unless the source of infection is identified and different antibiotic treatment is required.
If circulatory impairment or shock, immediately administer ceftriaxone IV, one dose of 80 mg/kg, then assess the
source of infection to determine further antibiotic treatment. See also Shock, Chapter 1. Transfuse urgently as for
severe anaemia (see below) if haemoglobin (Hb) is < 6 g/dl.
In less severe infections, assess the source of infection (see Fever, Chapter 1) and treat accordingly.
If fever is present and causes discomfort, undress the child. If insufficient, administer paracetamol PO in low dose:
10 mg/kg, up to 3 times maximum per 24 hours. Encourage oral fluids (including breast milk).
If hypothermia is present, place the child skin-to-skin against the mother's body and cover with a warm blanket.
Treat for infection as above. Check blood glucose level and treat for hypoglycaemia if necessary (see
Hypoglycaemia, Chapter 1).
In children with kwashiorkor, infection of cutaneous lesions is common and may progress to soft tissue or systemic
infection. If cutaneous infection is present, stop amoxicillin and start amoxicillin/clavulanic acid PO. Use
formulations in a ratio of 8:1 or 7:1. The dose is expressed in amoxicillin: 50 mg/kg 2 times daily for 7 days.
Severe anaemia
Children with Hb < 4 or < 6 with signs of decompensation (such as respiratory distress) or ongoing blood loss require
transfusion within the first 24 hours. See Anaemia (Chapter 1) for volume to be transfused and patient monitoring
during and after transfusion.
Preferably use packed red blood cells (PRBC), if available. Monitor closely for signs of fluid overload (see box
below).
Diarrhoea and dehydration
Diarrhoea is common. Therapeutic foods facilitate the recovery of physiological function of the gastrointestinal
tract. Amoxicillin administered as part of routine treatment reduces intestinal bacterial overgrowth. Diarrhoea
generally resolves without additional treatment. If an aetiological treatment is necessary, see Acute diarrhoea,
Chapter 3.
Zinc supplementation is not needed if children consume recommended amounts of therapeutic foods.
The diagnosis of dehydration is based on history and clinical features.
Clinical assessment is difficult in children with SAM as delayed skin pinch test and sunken eyes are often present
even in the absence of dehydration.
For classification of degree of dehydration adapted for children with SAM, see table below:
Page 57 / 409