Clinical features No Some Severe
(2 or more of the following signs) dehydration dehydration dehydration
Lethargic or
Mental status Normal Restless, irritability
unconscious
No thirst, drinks Unable to drink or drinks
Thirst Thirsty, drinks eagerly
normally poorly
Absent for
Urine output Normal Reduced
several hours
Recent frequent watery
Yes Yes Yes
diarrhoea and/or vomiting
Recent obvious rapid weight
No Yes Yes
loss
Acute diarrhoea with no dehydration (Plan A SAM)
Stools are neither frequent nor abundant (outpatient): oral rehydration solution (ORS) PO: 5 ml/kg after each loose
stool to prevent dehydration.
Stools are frequent and/or abundant (inpatient): ReSoMal c PO or by nasogastric tube (NGT): 5 ml/kg after each
loose stool to prevent dehydration.
In all cases, continue feeding and breastfeeding, encourage oral fluids.
Acute diarrhoea with some dehydration (Plan B SAM)
Determine the target weight (weight before the onset of diarrhoea) before starting rehydration. If not feasible (e.g.
new admission), estimate target weight as current weight x 1.06.
ReSoMal c PO or by NGT: 20 ml/kg/hour for 2 hours. In addition, administer 5 ml/kg of ReSoMal after each loose
stool if tolerated.
Assess after 2 hours (clinical evaluation and weight):
If improvement (diarrhoea and signs of dehydration regress):
Reduce ReSoMal to 10 ml/kg/hour until the signs of dehydration and/or weight loss (known or estimated)
have been corrected.
Assess every 2 hours.
Once there are no signs of dehydration and/or the target weight is reached, change to Plan A SAM to
prevent dehydration.
If no improvement after 2 to 4 hours or if oral rehydration cannot compensate for losses: change to Plan C SAM
"with circulatory impairment".
Continue feeding including breastfeeding.
Monitor for signs of fluid overload (see box below). Regardless of the target weight, stop rehydration if signs
of fluid overload appear.
Acute diarrhoea with severe dehydration (Plan C SAM)
In all patients:
Assess for circulatory impairment (see Shock, Chapter 1).
Estimate target weight as current weight x 1.1.
Page 58 / 409