Acute pharyngitis
Last updated: November 2020
Acute inflammation of the tonsils and pharynx. The majority of cases are of viral origin and do not require antibiotic
treatment. Group A streptococcus (GAS) is the main bacterial cause, and mainly affects children aged 3 to 14 years.
Acute rheumatic fever (ARF), a serious late complication of GAS pharyngitis, can be prevented with antibiotic
treatment.
One of the main objectives of assessing acute pharyngitis is to identify patients requiring antibiotic treatment.
Clinical features
Features common to all types of pharyngitis: throat pain, dysphagia (difficulty swallowing), inflammation of the
tonsils and pharynx, tender anterior cervical lymph nodes, with or without fever.
Specific features, depending on the cause:
Common forms:
Erythematous (red throat) or exudative (red throat and whitish exudate) pharyngitis: this appearance is
common to both viral and GAS pharyngitis. Centor criteria help assessment and decrease the empirical use of
antibiotics in settings where rapid testing for GAS is not available. A Centor score of less than 2 rules out GAS
infection [1] [2] . Nevertheless, in patients with risk factors (immunosuppression, personal or family history of ARF)
for poststreptococcal complications, or for local or general complications, do not use Centor score and
prescribe empirical antibiotic treatment.
Centor criteria
Criteria Score
Temperature > 38 °C 1
Absence of cough 1
Tender anterior cervical lymph node(s) 1
Tonsillar swelling or exudate 1
In patients over 14 years, the probability of GAS pharyngitis is low. Infectious mononucleosis (IM) due to the
Epstein-Barr virus should be suspected in adolescents and young adults with extreme fatigue, generalized
adenopathy and often splenomegaly.
Erythematous or exudative pharyngitis may also be associated with gonococcal or primary HIV infection. In
these cases, the diagnosis is mainly prompted by the patient's history.
Pseudomembranous pharyngitis (red tonsils/pharynx covered with an adherent greyish white false membrane):
see Diphtheria, Chapter 2.
Vesicular pharyngitis (clusters of tiny blisters or ulcers on the tonsils): always viral (coxsackie virus or primary
herpetic infection).
Ulcero-necrotic pharyngitis: hard and painless syphilitic chancre of the tonsil; tonsillar ulcer soft on palpation in
a patient with poor oral hygiene and malodorous breath (Vincent tonsillitis).
Other forms of pharyngitis:
Page 68 / 409