Spots on oral mucosa (Koplik’s spots) accompanied by conjunctivitis and skin rash (see Measles, Chapter 8).
“Strawberry” (red and bumpy) tongue accompanied by a skin rash: scarlet fever caused by GAS.
Local complications:
Peritonsillar, retropharyngeal or lateral pharyngeal abscess: fever, intense pain, dysphagia, hoarse voice, trismus
(limitation of mouth opening), unilateral deviation of the uvula.
General complications:
Complications due to the toxin: diphtheria (see Diphtheria, Chapter 2).
Poststreptococcal complications: ARF, acute glomerulonephritis.
Signs of serious illness in children: severe dehydration, severe difficulty swallowing, upper airway compromise,
deterioration of general condition.
Differential diagnosis: epiglottitis (see Epiglottitis, Chapter 2).
Treatment
Symptomatic treatment (fever and pain): paracetamol or ibuprofen PO (Fever, Chapter 1).
Centor score ≤ 1: viral pharyngitis, which typically resolves within a few days (or weeks, for IM): no antibiotic
treatment.
Centor score ≥ 2 or scarlet fever: antibiotic treatment for GAS infections [3] :
If single-use injection equipment is available, benzathine benzylpenicillin is the drug of choice as streptococcus
A resistance to penicillin remains rare; it is the only antibiotic proven effective in reducing the incidence of
rheumatic fever; and the treatment is administered as a single dose.
benzathine benzylpenicillin IM
Children under 30 kg (or under 10 years): 600 000 IU single dose
Children 30 kg and over (or 10 years and over) and adults: 1.2 MIU single dose
Penicillin V is the oral reference treatment, but poor adherence is predictable due to the length of treatment.
phenoxymethylpenicillin (penicillin V) PO for 10 days
Children 1 to < 6 years: 250 mg 2 times daily
Children 6 to < 12 years: 500 mg 2 times daily
Children 12 years and over and adults: 1 g 2 times daily
Children under 1 year: 125 mg 2 times daily
Amoxicillin is an alternative and the treatment has the advantage of being relatively short. However, it can
cause adverse skin reactions in patients with undiagnosed IM and thus should be avoided when IM has not been
excluded
amoxicillin PO for 6 days
Children: 25 mg/kg 2 times daily
Adults: 1 g 2 times daily
Macrolides should be reserved for penicillin allergic patients as resistance to macrolides is frequent and their
efficacy in the prevention of rheumatic fever has not been studied.
azithromycin PO for 3 days
Children: 20 mg/kg once daily (max. 500 mg daily)
Adults: 500 mg once daily
Gonococcal or syphilitic pharyngitis: as for genital gonorrhoea (Chapter 9) and syphilis (Chapter 9).
Diphtherial pharyngitis: see Diphtheria (Chapter 2).
Vincent tonsillitis: metronidazole or amoxicillin.
Peritonsillar retropharyngeal or lateral pharyngeal abscess: refer for surgical drainage.
Page 69 / 409