Diphtheria
Last updated: October 2022
Diphtheria is a bacterial infection due to Corynebacterium diphtheriae, spread from person to person through
inhalation of infected respiratory droplets of symptomatic or asymptomatic individuals, or direct contact with
contaminated objects or diphtheria skin lesions [1] [2] a .
After infection, C. diphtheriae has an incubation period of 1 to 5 days (max. 10 days) [1] during which time it multiplies in
the upper respiratory tract. The bacteria secretes a toxin which causes severe local as well as systemic effects. Death
can occur from airway obstruction or as a result of systemic complications, including damage to the myocardium and
nervous system, caused by the toxin.
Cases can remain infectious up to 8 weeks after initial infection [2] . Antibiotic treatment can reduce infectiousness to 6
days [3] .
Vaccination is the key to prevention and control of diphtheria. It protects individuals from severe disease (fewer and
less severe symptoms) but does not prevent the spread of C. diphtheriae. Clinical disease does not confer protective
immunity and vaccination is an integral part of case management.
Clinical features
During clinical examination respect standard, contact, and droplet precautions (handwashing, gloves, gown, mask,
etc.). Conduct a careful examination of the throat.
Signs of respiratory diphtheria a :
pharyngitis, rhinopharyngitis, tonsillitis or laryngitis with tough, greyish, firmly adherent pseudo-membranes of the
pharynx, nasopharynx, tonsils, or larynx;
dysphagia and cervical adenitis, at times progressing to massive swelling of the neck;
airway obstruction and possible suffocation when the infection extends to the nasal passages, larynx, trachea
and bronchi;
fever is generally low-grade [2] .
Generalised signs due to effects of the toxin:
cardiac dysfunction (tachycardia, arrhythmias), severe myocarditis with heart failure and possibly cardiogenic
shock (see Shock, Chapter 1) 3 to 7 days or 2 to 3 weeks after onset of the disease;
neuropathies in 2 to 8 weeks after the onset of disease leading to nasal voice and difficulty with swallowing
(paralysis of the soft palate), vision (ocular motor paralysis), breathing (paralysis of respiratory muscles) and
ambulation (limb paralysis);
oliguria, anuria and acute renal failure.
Differential diagnoses: Epiglottitis and Acute pharyngitis, Chapter 2, Stomatitis, Chapter 3.
Laboratory
Diagnosis is confirmed by isolation of toxigenic C. diphtheriae by culture (and antibiotic susceptibility test) of swab
specimens collected from the affected areas: throat (tonsils, pharyngeal mucosa, soft palate, exudate, ulcer, etc.),
nasopharynx.
The presence of the toxin is confirmed by PCR testing (detection of diphtheria toxin gene).
Treatment
Isolation of patients; standard, droplet, and contact precautions for medical staff.
Page 71 / 409