Management of close contacts
Close contacts include household members living under the same roof and people who were directly exposed (less than
one metre) to nasopharyngeal secretions of the patient on a regular basis (e.g. family or close friends, children in the
same class, medical personnel) during the 5 days or nights prior to onset of symptoms of the case [4] .
Collect nasal and pharyngeal swabs for culture before starting antibiotic prophylaxis; temperature and throat
examination daily (10 days); exclusion from school or work until 48 hours after starting antibiotic prophylaxis. If
symptoms of respiratory infection appear: treat immediately as a case of diphtheria.
Antibiotic prophylaxis:
benzathine benzylpenicillin IM
Children under 30 kg: 600 000 IU single dose
Children 30 kg and over and adults: 1.2 MIU single dose
Benzathine benzylpenicillin should never be administered by IV route.
or azithromycin PO or erythromycin PO as above for 7 days.
Check vaccination status:
if less than 3 injections received: complete vaccination schedule (see Prevention below);
if 3 injections received, with the last injection over one year ago: administer a booster dose immediately;
if 3 injections received, with the last injection less than one year ago: a booster dose is not immediately
necessary.
Outbreak surveillance measures
A suspected case of diphtheria is defined as a person with:
pharyngitis, rhinopharyngitis, tonsillitis and/or laryngitis
AND
an adherent pseudo-membrane of the pharynx, nose, tonsils and/or larynx [1] .
Isolate and treat suspect cases without delay. Collect swab samples before starting antibiotic treatment. Submit
case notification to the public health authorities within 24 hours [1] .
Prevention
Routine vaccination (EPI), for information: 3 doses of conjugate vaccine containing the higher potency (D)
formulation of diphtheria toxoid as soon as possible as of 6 weeks of age and at 4 week intervals; D booster
between 12 and 23 months, then between 4 and 7 years; booster with a vaccine containing a reduced dose (d) of
diphtheria toxoid between 9 and 15 years [5] .
Catch-up vaccination (individuals who have not received routine vaccination), for information:
children 1 to 6 years: 3 doses of conjugate vaccine containing the higher potency (D) formulation of diphtheria
toxoid at least 4 weeks apart;
children 7 years and over and adults (including medical staff): 3 doses of conjugate vaccine containing a reduced
dose (d) of diphtheria toxoid. Administer with a minimum interval of 4 weeks between first and second dose and
an interval of at least 6 months between second and third dose (in the event of an outbreak this interval may be
reduced to 4 weeks to achieve protection quicker).
Administer 2 subsequent booster doses containing d at least 4 weeks apart [5] .
Footnotes
(a) This guide focuses on respiratory diphtheria and signs due to the toxin. It should be noted that cutaneous diphtheria is still
a significant reservoir of C. diphtheriae.
Page 73 / 409