Pertussis (whooping cough)
Last updated: December 2024
Pertussis is a highly contagious infection of the respiratory tract caused by the bacterium Bordetella pertussis.
It is transmitted via airborne droplets spread by infected people (by coughing and/or sneezing), particularly within 3
weeks of the onset of cough [1] . Despite the development of effective vaccines, it remains an important cause of
morbidity and mortality, particularly in infants.
This disease is endemic worldwide and outbreaks are common. It most commonly affects children < 5 years, but can
affect any age group. Reported incidence in adolescents and adults has been increasing in some regions [2] .
Pertussis is a notifiable disease in many countries, and cases should be reported to local or national public health
authorities. Pertussis immunization is part of all vaccination schedules and is included in the Expanded Programme on
Immunization (EPI).
Clinical features
After an incubation period of 7 to 10 days (up to 21 days), the illness evolves in 3 stages [3] :
Catarrhal stage (1 to 2 weeks, but may be shorter in infants < 6 months):
Runny nose, mild cough, no or low-grade fever.
During this stage, the disease is indistinguishable from other non-specific respiratory infections.
Paroxysmal stage (1 to 6 weeks):
Cough of increasing severity, occuring in characteristic bouts (paroxysms) of a series of coughs during one
exhalation, followed by a laboured inspiration causing a distinctive gasping sound (whoop), and/or post-tussive
vomiting.
No or low-grade fever.
Apnoea and cyanosis (in infants).
Prolonged cough, sometimes without paroxysms or whoop (particularly in older children and adults).
Complications may include secondary bacterial pneumonia (new-onset fever can be an indicator), dehydration and
malnutrition triggered by feeding difficulty due to cough and vomiting, seizures, encephalopathy, sudden death,
intracranial bleeding, petechiae, rib fracture, hernia, rectal prolapse.
Convalescent stage (weeks to months):
Paroxysms of cough gradually decrease in frequency and severity.
The disease is most severe, with a high risk of death, in infants. Adolescents and adults commonly have milder
symptoms, but older adults, immunocompromised persons, and people with underlying respiratory conditions are at risk
of severe disease and hospitalisation [4] .
Pertussis is most contagious and antibiotic treatment is most beneficial during the catarrhal stage of the illness. Since
this is also the period during which clinical symptoms and signs are non-specific, it is necessary to maintain a high index
of suspicion with clues from the context. These include patients with any compatible symptoms and close contact with
a suspected case or in a pertussis outbreak setting.
Management
Suspected cases
Antibiotic treatment
Page 85 / 409