Supportive care
Hydration and nutrition: if child is breastfeeding, continue; ensure adequate fluid and calorie intake, give frequent small
feedings including after coughing bouts and post-tussive vomiting; some patients may require nasogastric tube feeding
or IV maintenance fluids; be aware that NG tube placement might provoke paroxysmal coughing, so it should be
inserted by experienced medical staff with minimal manipulation. If weight loss occurred during illness, consider food
supplements for several weeks during convalescent stage when child is able to eat comfortably.
Respiratory measures
Place the patient in a semi-reclining position (± 30°).
In case of apnoea, stimulate the patient, but be prepared to ventilate if necessary (keep bag and mask accessible).
Administer oxygen if SpO < 92%, for severe respiratory distress, or for recurrent apnoea. Perform gentle
2
oropharyngeal suctioning if required but avoid deep suctioning (may provoke paroxysmal coughing).
For children treated as outpatients, teach the parents about signs that require immediate medical attention (e.g.
respiratory difficulty, apnoea, cyanosis, increasing fever, seizures or impaired consciousness, dehydration, feeding
difficulty).
Contacts
Post-exposure prophylaxis (same antibiotic treatment as for suspect cases) is recommended, regardless of
vaccination status, for:
Asymptomatic close contacts (having face-to-face exposure or direct contact with oral, nasal, or other
respiratory secretions [7] ) of a person with suspected pertussis within 3 weeks of onset of paroxysmal cough
Asymptomatic exposed people at high risk of complications or who will come into contact with people at high
risk [4] [8] :
pregnant women in the third trimester (risk to neonate),
infants under 1 year,
people with immunodepression, moderate to severe asthma, and consider for people with other underlying
respiratory conditions and adults ≥ 65 years.
Isolation of asymptomatic contacts is not necessary.
Symptomatic contacts should be treated as suspected pertussis.
Assess whether the person is up-to-date with pertussis vaccination according to national protocol (see
Prevention).
Prevention
Pertussis vaccination provides substantial immunity that wanes over time [1] .
In all cases (suspected cases and contacts) who are not up-to-date with pertussis vaccination, begin or refer for
vaccination.
Routine vaccination with a 3-dose primary series of polyvalent vaccine containing pertussis antigen(s) from the age
of 6 weeks or according to national protocol. A booster dose is recommended, preferably during the second year
of life [1] . Based on local epidemiology, further booster doses may be required later in life to reinforce immunity and
reduce the risk of developing pertussis.
If the pertussis primary vaccination series has been interrupted, it should be completed rather than restarted from
the beginning.
In general, vaccinations are deferred for patients with moderate to severe illness, but the vaccine should be
administered as soon as the patient's condition has improved.
Vaccination will probably not prevent disease in a person who is already infected by B. pertussis. It is not a
substitute for post-exposure prophylaxis [7] [9] .
Page 87 / 409