Bronchiolitis
Last updated: October 2023
Bronchiolitis is an epidemic and seasonal viral infection of the lower respiratory tract in children less than 2 years of
age, characterised by bronchiolar obstruction.
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is responsible for 70% of cases of bronchiolitis. Transmission of RSV is direct,
through inhalation of droplets (coughing, sneezing), and indirect, through contact with hands or materials contaminated
by infected secretions.
In the majority of cases, bronchiolitis is benign, resolves spontaneously (relapses are possible), and can be treated on
an outpatient basis.
Severe cases may occur, which put the child at risk due to exhaustion or secondary bacterial infection. Hospitalisation
is necessary when signs/criteria of severity are present (10 to 20% of cases).
Clinical features
Tachypnoea, dyspnoea, wheezing, cough; profuse, frothy, obstructive secretions.
On auscultation: prolonged expiration with diffuse, bilateral wheezes; sometimes diffuse fine, end-inspiratory
crackles.
Rhinopharyngitis, with dry cough, precedes these features by 24 to 72 hours; fever is absent or moderate.
Signs of severity:
Significant deterioration in general condition, toxic appearance (pallor, greyish colouration)
Apnoea, cyanosis (check lips, buccal mucosa, fingernails)
Respiratory distress (nasal flaring, sternal and chest wall indrawing)
Anxiety and agitation (hypoxia), altered level of consciousness
Respiratory rate > 60/minute
Decreased signs of respiratory distress (exhaustion) and decline of respiratory rate (< 30/minute below the age
of 1 year and < 20/minute below the age of 3 years). Exercise caution in interpreting these signs as indicators of
clinical improvement.
SpO persistently < 92%
2
Sweats, tachycardia at rest and in the absence of fever
Silence on auscultation (severe bronchospasm)
Difficulty drinking or sucking (reduced tolerance for exertion)
Treatment
Treatment is symptomatic. Obstructive signs and symptoms last for about 10 days; cough may persist for 2 weeks or
longer.
Hospitalise children with one of the following criteria:
Presence of any sign of severity
Pre-existing pathology (cardiac or pulmonary disease, malnutrition, HIV infection, etc.)
Consider hospitalisation on a case-by-case basis in the following situations:
Associated acute pathology (viral gastro-enteritis, bacterial infection, etc.)
Age less than 3 months
In all other cases, the child may be treated at home, provided the parents are taught how to carry out treatment, and
what signs of severity should lead to re-consultation.
Page 92 / 409