Pneumonia in children under 5 years of age
The most common causes are viruses, pneumococcus and Haemophilus influenzae.
Clinical features
Cough or difficulty breathing
Fever often high (> 39 °C), but the child may present with low-grade fever or may have no fever (often a sign of
serious illness)
Clinical examination must be done on a calm child in order to correctly count the respiratory rate and look for signs of
severity.
A child has tachypnoea (increased respiratory rate) if:
RR ≥ 60 breaths/minute in children under 1 months
RR ≥ 50 breaths/minute in children from 1 to 11 months
RR ≥ 40 breaths/minute in children from 12 months to 5 years
On pulmonary auscultation: dullness with diminished vesicular breath sounds, crepitations and sometimes bronchial
breathing or normal pulmonary auscultation.
Signs of severity (severe pneumonia):
Chest indrawing: the inferior thoracic wall depresses on inspiration as the superior abdomen expands
Cyanosis (lips, oral mucosa, fingernails) or SpO < 90%
2
Nasal flaring
Altered consciousness (child is abnormally sleepy or difficult to wake)
Stridor (hoarse noise on inspiration)
Grunting (a short repetitive noise produced by a partial closure of the vocal cords) on expiration
Refusal to drink or feed
Children under 2 months
Severe malnutrition
Notes:
In malnourished children, the RR thresholds should be decreased by 5 breaths/minute from those listed above.
Chest indrawing is significant if it is clearly visible and present at all times. If it is observed when a child is upset or
feeding and is not visible when the child is resting, there is no chest indrawing.
In children under 2 months of age, moderate chest indrawing is normal as the thoracic wall is flexible.
If only the soft tissues between the ribs or above the clavicles depress, there is no chest indrawing.
Consider also:
Malaria in endemic areas, as it may also cause cough and tachypnoea.
Staphylococcal pneumonia in patients with empyema or painful abdominal swelling and diarrhoea.
Pneumocystosis in children with confirmed or suspected HIV infection (see HIV infection and AIDS, Chapter 8).
Tuberculosis:
in a child with cough, fever and poor weight gain and a history of close contact with a tuberculous patient a . For
the diagnosis, refer to the MSF handbook, Tuberculosis.
in the event of pneumonia complicated with empyema (pus in the pleural space).
Treatment
Severe pneumonia (inpatient treatment)
Page 95 / 409