If the child's condition does not improve after 48 hours with ceftriaxone + cloxacillin, consider tuberculosis. For the
diagnosis, refer to the guide Tuberculosis, MSF.
If tuberculosis is unlikely, continue with ceftriaxone + cloxacillin and add azithromycin (see Atypical pneumonia).
Notes:
For malnourished children, refer to specific protocol.
In the event of moderate-large empyema, assess if drainage is required. Administer antibiotics active against
pneumococci and staphylococci (see Staphylococcal pneumonia).
Adjuvant therapy
Fever: paracetamol PO (Chapter 1).
Infants: keep warm.
Install on an incline (head elevated) or in semi-sitting position.
Clear the airway (nasal irrigation with 0.9% sodium chloride if needed).
Oxygen at the flow rate required to maintain SpO ≥ 90% or, if pulse oxymeter is not available, minimum 1
2
litre/minute.
Maintain adequate hydration and nutrition:
In children with severe respiratory difficulty: place an IV line and give 70% of normal maintenance fluids. Resume
oral feeding as soon as possible (no severe respiratory difficulty, ability to eat normally).
Use a nasogastric tube only if an IV line cannot be established: children under 12 months: 5 ml/kg/hour; children
over 12 months: 3 to 4 ml/kg/hour; alternate milk and water. Resume normal oral feeding as soon as possible.
In the absence of severe respiratory difficulty: breastfeed on demand; milk/food and water by spoon on
demand.
ORS when required (Dehydration, Chapter 1).
Pneumonia with no signs of severity
Children under 2 months
Admit the child for inpatient care and treat for severe pneumonia.
Children from 2 months to 5 years
Treat as outpatient, except infants.
amoxicillin PO: 30 mg/kg 3 times daily for 5 days
Follow-up in 48 to 72 hours or sooner if the child’s condition deteriorates:
If the condition is improving c : continue with the same antibiotic to complete treatment.
If there is no improvement after 3 days of correct administration: add azithromycin (see Atypical pneumonia).
If the condition is deteriorating: hospitalise and treat as severe pneumonia.
Footnotes
(a) Contact is defined as living in the same household, or in close and regular contact with any known or suspected tuberculous
case within the last 12 months.
(b) The solvent of ceftriaxone for IM injection contains lidocaine. Ceftriaxone reconstituted using this solvent must never be
administered by IV route. For IV administration, water for injection must always be used.
(c) Improvement criteria include: fever reduction, diminished respiratory distress, improved SpO , improved appetite and/or
2
activity.
Page 97 / 409