Zinc sulfate is given in combination with oral rehydration solution in order to reduce the duration and severity of
diarrhoea, as well as to prevent further occurrences in the 2 to 3 months after treatment:
zinc sulfate PO
Children under 6 months: 10 mg (½ tablet) once daily for 10 days
Children from 6 months to 5 years: 20 mg (1 tablet) once daily for 10 days
Place the half-tablet or full tablet in a teaspoon, add a bit of water to dissolve it, and give the entire spoonful to the
child.
Antimicrobial treatment
Diarrhoea without blood
Most acute diarrhoeas are caused by viruses unresponsive to antimicrobials. Antimicrobials can be beneficial in the
event of cholera or giardiasis.
Cholera: the most important part of treatment is rehydration. In the absence of resistance (perform antibiotic-
sensitivity testing at the beginning of an outbreak), antibiotic treatment shortens the duration of diarrhoea. See the
guide Management of a cholera epidemic, MSF.
Giardiasis: see Intestinal protozoan infections, Chapter 6.
Diarrhoea with blood
Shigellosis is the most frequent cause of bloody diarrhoea (amoebiasis is much less common). If there is no
laboratory diagnosis to confirm the presence of amoebae, first line treatment is for shigellosis (Chapter 3).
Amoebiasis: antiparasitic treatment only if motile Entamoeba histolytica amoebae are found in stools or if a
correct shigellosis treatment has been ineffective (see Amoebiasis, Chapter 3).
Prevention
Breastfeeding reduces infant morbidity and mortality from diarrhoea and the severity of diarrhoea episodes.
When the child is weaned preparation and storage of food are associated with the risk of contamination by faecal
micro-organisms: discourage bottle-feeding; food must be cooked well; milk or porridge must never be stored at
room temperature.
Access to sufficient amounts of clean water and personal hygiene (washing hands with soap and water before food
preparation and before eating, after defecation etc.) are effective methods of reducing the spread of diarrhoea.
In countries with a high rotavirus diarrhoea fatality rate, the WHO recommends routine rotavirus vaccination in
children between 6 weeks and 24 months of age [1] .
References
1. Weekly epidemiological record/Relevé épidémiologique hebdomadaire 1st February 2013, 88th year/1er Février 2013, 88e
année No. 5, 2013, 88, 49–64.
https://www.who.int/wer/2013/wer8805.pdf [Accessed 02 January 2019]
Page 11 5/ 409