Amoebiasis
Amoebiasis is a parasitic infection due to the intestinal protozoa Entamoeba histolytica. Transmission is faecal-oral,
by ingestion of amoebic cysts from food or water contaminated with faeces. Usually, ingested cysts release non-
pathogenic amoebae and 90% of carriers are asymptomatic.
In 10% of infected patients, pathogenic amoebae penetrate the mucous of the colon: this is the intestinal amoebiasis
(amoebic dysentery). The clinical picture is similar to that of shigellosis, which is the principal cause of dysentery.
Occasionally, the pathogenic amoebae migrate via the blood stream and form peripheral abscesses. Amoebic liver
abscess is the most common form of extra-intestinal amoebiasis.
Clinical features
Amoebic dysentery
diarrhoea containing red blood and mucus
abdominal pain, tenesmus
no fever or moderate fever
possibly signs of dehydration
Amoebic liver abscess
painful hepatomegaly; mild jaundice may be present
anorexia, weight loss, nausea, vomiting
intermittent fever, sweating, chills; change in overall condition
Investigations
Amoebic dysentery: identification of mobile trophozoites (E. histolytica histolytica) in fresh stool samples
Amoebic liver abscess: indirect haemoagglutination and ELISA
POCUS a : perform an EFAST (extended focused assessment with sonography for trauma) examination, with
additional views of the liver and spleen to evaluate for signs of amoebic lesions. Contact an expert (local or via
telemedicine services) to help interpret the images and differentiate amoebic abscesses from other pathologies
with similar characteristics.
Treatment
Amoebic dysentery
The presence of cysts alone should not lead to the treatment of amoebiasis.
Amoebiasis confirmed with a parasitological stool examination:
tinidazole PO
Children: 50 mg/kg once daily for 3 days (max. 2 g daily)
Adults: 2 g once daily for 3 days
or metronidazole PO
Children: 15 mg/kg 3 times daily for 5 days
Adults: 500 mg 3 times daily for 5 days
If there is no laboratory, first line treatment for dysentery is for shigellosis. Treat for amoebiasis if correct
treatment for shigellosis has been ineffective.
Oral rehydration salts (ORS) if there is risk of, or if there are signs of dehydration (see Dehydration, Chapter 1).
Amoebic liver abscess
tinidazole PO: same treatment for 5 days
metronidazole PO: same treatment for 5 to 10 days
Page 11 8/ 409