Look first for dehydration (Dehydration, Chapter 1), especially due to inadequate fluid intake or excessive fluid losses (high fever, vomiting, diarrhoea). Treat dehydration if present. Be aware of the risk of fluid overload and acute pulmonary oedema. Monitor for the return of urine output. Acute renal failure (ARF) is found almost exclusively in adults and is more common in Asia than Africa. Insert a urinary catheter, measure output. Restrict fluids to 1 litre/day (30 ml/kg/day in children), plus additional volume equal to urine output. Renal dialysis is often necessary. Antimalarial treatment in pregnant women Uncomplicated P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae, P. knowlesi malaria As other patients. Primaquine should not be given in pregnancy. Uncomplicated falciparum malaria All ACT included in the table Treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria can be used in all trimesters. If ACTs are not available, quinine PO (for dosing, see Treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria) combined with clindamycin PO if possible (10 mg/kg 2 times daily for 7 days) may be an alternative to ACT. Primaquine should not be given in pregnancy. Severe malaria Artesunate, or if unavailable artemether, is recommended in all trimesters. Quinine IV is not recommended as standard treatment, however it still remains in some national protocols. Prevention For pregnant women in areas with high risk of infection with P. falciparum, refer to the guide Essential obstetric and newborn care, MSF. In areas with seasonal malaria transmission (in particular across the Sahel sub-region), seasonal malaria chemoprevention in children < 5 years reduces mortality: administer amodiaquine + SP at monthly intervals for 4 months during the transmission period [4] . In malaria endemic areas and in epidemic-prone contexts, all in-patient facilities (including HIV treatment centres and feeding centres), should be furnished with long-lasting insecticidal nets (LLINs). For more information, refer to the guide Public