Meningoencephalitic stage: evidence of trypanosomes OR > 5 white cells/mm3 Treatment (except in pregnant women) Due to the toxicity of trypanocides, detection of the parasite is essential before initiating treatment. In the absence of parasitological confirmation, treatment may nevertheless be justified in certain cases: very strong clinical suspicion, patients in life-threatening condition, strong serological suspicion (CATT 1:16 positive) in a population where the disease is highly prevalent (> 2%). Several treatment regimens exist. Check national recommendations and local resistance levels. Treatment must be administered under close medical supervision. Patients receiving pentamidine can be treated as outpatients but those receiving suramin, eflornithine (with or without nifurtimox) or melarsoprol should be hospitalised. After treatment, patients should be checked every 6 months (clinical examination, lumbar puncture and examination for trypanosomes) over 24 months, to look for relapse. Haemolymphatic stage (Stage I) Gambiense HAT pentamidine isetionate deep IM Children and adults: 4 mg/kg once daily for 7 to 10 days Patients should receive a source of glucose (meal, sweet tea) one hour before injection (risk of hypoglycaemia); they should remain supine during administration and one hour after injection (risk of hypotension). Rhodesiense HAT suramin slow IV Children and adults: D1: test dose of 4 to 5 mg/kg D3, D10, D17, D24, D31: 20 mg/kg (max. 1 g per injection) Suramin may cause anaphylactic reactions, a test dose is recommended prior to starting treatment. In the event of an anaphylactic reaction after the test dose, the patients must not be given suramin again. Meningoencephalitic stage (Stage II) Before administrating trypanocides, the priority is to improve the patient’s general condition (rehydration, treatment of malaria, intestinal worms, malnutrition, bacterial infections). It is nonetheless recommended not to postpone the trypanocidal treatment for more than 10 days. Gambiense HAT First choice: nifurtimox-eflornithine combination therapy (NECT) nifurtimox PO Children and