Infection/Epidemiology Clinical features/Diagnosis Treatment Lung flukes The two most prominent symptoms are prolonged (> 2 weeks) praziquantel Paragonimus sp productive cough and intermittent haemoptysis (rusty-brown sputum). PO Distribution: South-East In endemic areas, paragonimosis should be considered whenever Children 4 years Asia, China, parts of pulmonary tuberculosis is suspected as the clinical and radiological and over and Cameroon, Nigeria, features overlap. Paragonimosis is confirmed when eggs are adults: Gabon, Congo, Colombia, detected in sputum (or possibly in stools). 25 mg/kg 3 Peru times daily for 2 Transmission: eating raw days freshwater crustaceans Hepatobiliary flukes Fasciola hepatica and During migration phase: asthenia, prolonged fever, myalgia, right triclabendazole gigantica upper quadrant pain, mild hepatomegaly; sometimes, allergic signs PO Distribution: worldwide, in (e.g. pruritus). At this stage, the diagnosis is rarely considered and can Children and areas where sheep and only be confirmed through serology; parasitological examination of adults: cattle are raised stools is always negative. 10 mg/kg single Transmission: eating Once adult flukes are present in the biliary tract: presentation dose uncooked aquatic plants resembles cholelithiasis: right upper quadrant pain, recurrent episodes May repeat in of obstructive jaundice/ febrile cholangitis. The diagnosis is 24 hours in the confirmed when parasite eggs are detected in stools (or flukes are event of severe seen in the biliary tract with sonography). infection Opisthorchis felineus Abdominal pain and diarrhoea. With heavy infection, hepatobiliary praziquantel (Asia, Eastern Europe) symptoms: hepatomegaly, right upper quadrant pain, jaundice or PO Opisthorchis viverrini episodes of febrile cholangitis. The diagnosis is confirmed when Children 4 years (Cambodia, Laos, parasite eggs are detected in stools. and over and Vietnam, Thailand) adults: Clonorchis sinensis 25 mg/kg 3 (China, Koera, Vietnam) times daily for 2 Transmission: eating days raw/undercooked freshwater fish Intestinal flukes Symptoms are limited to diarrhoea and epigastric or abdominal pain. praziquantel Fasciolopsis buski