Clinical features/Diagnosis Parasite/Epidemiology a (established infection) Genito-urinary S. haematobium Urinary manifestations: schistosomiasis Distribution: Africa, In endemic areas, urinary schistosomiasis should be Madagascar and the suspected in any patients who complain of macroscopic Arabian peninsula haematuria (red coloured urine throughout, or at the end of, micturition). Haematuria is frequently associated with polyuria/dysuria (frequent and painful micturition). In patients, especially children and adolescents, with urinary symptoms, visual inspection of the urine (and dipstick test for microscopic haematuria if the urine appears grossly normal) is indispensible. Presumptive treatment is recommended in the presence of macro- or microscopic haematuria, when parasitological confirmation (parasite eggs detected in urine) cannot be obtained. Genital manifestations: In women, symptoms of genital infection (white-yellow or bloody vaginal discharge, itching, lower abdominal pain, dyspareunia) or vaginal lesions resembling genital warts or ulcerative lesions on the cervix; in men, haematospermia (blood in the semen). If left untreated: risk of recurrent urinary tract infections, fibrosis/calcification of the bladder and ureters, bladder cancer; increased susceptibility to sexually transmitted infections and risk of infertility. In endemic areas, genito-urinary schistosomiasis may be a differential diagnosis to the genito-urinary tuberculosis, and in women, to the sexually transmitted infections (especially in women with an history of haematuria). Intestinal S. mansoni Non-specific digestive symptoms (abdominal pain; diarrhoea, schistosomiasis Distribution: tropical intermittent or chronic, with or without blood) and Africa, Madagascar, the hepatomegaly. Arabian peninsula, South For S. intercalatum: digestive symptoms only (rectal pain, America (especially Brazil) tenesmus, rectal prolapse, bloody diarrhoea). S. japonicum If left untreated: risk of hepatic fibrosis, portal hypertension, Distribution: China, cirrhosis, gastrointestinal haemorrhage (hematemesis, melena, Indonesia, the Philippines etc.), except with S. intercalatum (less pathogenic than other S. mekongi intestinal schistosomes, no severe hepatic lesions). Distribution: parts of Lao The diagnosis is confirmed when parasite eggs are detected PDR, Cambodia (along the in stools.