Strongyloides stercoralis During larval penetration/migration: ivermectin PO(b) single dose Distribution: humid tropical cutaneous signs (erythema and pruritus at the Children > 15 kg and adults: regions site of penetration, which may persist several 200 micrograms/kg, on an Transmission: larval skin weeks) and pulmonary symptoms (similar to empty stomach penetration and auto- ascariasis). While less effective, a 3-day infection Once larvae are present in the intestine: treatment with albendazole gastrointestinal symptoms (bloating, PO (as for trichuriasis) may be abdominal and epigastric pain, vomiting, an alternative. diarrhoea). Hyperinfections are refractory Chronic strongyloidiasis to conventional therapy. Intestinal larvae may re-infect their host (auto- Prolonged or intermittent infection) by penetrating through the intestinal multiple-dose regimens are wall or by migrating transcutaneously from required. perianal skin. Chronic infections result in prolonged or recurrent pulmonary and gastrointestinal symptoms. Transcutaneous migration of intestinal larvae gives rise to a typical rash (larva currens), mainly in the anal region and on the trunk: sinuous, raised, linear, migrating lesion, intensely pruritic, moving rapidly (5 to 10 cm/hour) and lasting several hours or days. Complications Hyperinfection (massive infestation) results in exacerbation of pulmonary and gastrointestinal symptoms, and possible dissemination of larvae to atypical locations, (CNS, heart, etc.). This form occurs mainly in patients receiving immunosuppressive therapy (e.g. corticosteroids). Strongyloides larvae may be detected through parasitological examination of stools. Enterobiasis (pinworms) Anal pruritus, more intense at night, vulvovaginitis albendazole PO single dose, Enterobius vermicularis in girls (rare). In practice, the diagnosis is most as for ascariasis Distribution: worldwide often made when worms are seen on the or Transmission: faecal-oral perianal skin (or in the stool in heavy infestation). mebendazole PO single dose route or auto-infection Pinworms are small (1 cm), mobile, white, Children > 6 months and adults: cylindrical worms with slightly tapered ends. 100 mg Pinworm eggs may be collected from