Onchocerciasis (river blindness) The distribution of onchocerciasis is linked to that of its vector (Simulium), which reproduces near rapidly flowing rivers in intertropical Africa (99% of cases), Latin America (Guatemala, Mexico, Ecuador, Colombia, Venezuela, Brazil) and Yemen. Clinical features In endemic areas, the following signs, alone or in combination, are suggestive of onchocerciasis: Onchocercomas: painless subcutaneous nodules containing adult worms, usually found over a bony prominence (iliac crest, trochanters, sacrum, rib cage, skull, etc.), measuring several mm or cm in size, firm, smooth, round or oval, mobile or adherent to underlying tissue; single, or multiple and clustered. Acute papular onchodermatitis: papular rash, sometimes diffuse but often confined to the buttocks or lower extremities, intensely itchy, associated with scratch marks, often superinfected (“filarial scabies”) a . This arises from dermal invasion by microfilariae. Late chronic skin lesions: patchy depigmentation on the shins (“leopard skin”), skin atrophy or areas of dry, thickened, peeling skin (lichenification; “lizard skin”). Visual disturbances and ocular lesions: see Onchocerciasis, Chapter 5. Laboratory Detection of the microfilariae in the skin (skin snip biopsy, iliac crest). If the skin biopsy is positive, look for loiasis in regions where loiasis is co-endemic (mainly in Central Africa). Treatment Antiparasitic treatment Diethylcarbamazine is contra-indicated (risk of severe ocular lesions). Doxycycline PO (200 mg once daily for 4 weeks; if possible 6 weeks) kills a significant percentage of adult worms and progressively reduces the number of O. volvulus microfilariae b . It is contraindicated in children < 8 years and pregnant or breast-feeding women. Ivermectin PO is the drug of choice: 150 micrograms/kg single dose; a 2nd dose should be administered after 3 months if clinical signs persist. Repeat the treatment every 6 or 12 months to maintain the parasite load below the threshold at which clinical signs appear c . Ivermectin is