Loiasis The distribution of loiasis is linked to that of its vector (Chrysops) in forests or savannah with gallery forests in West or Central Africa (limits West: Benin; East: Uganda; North: Sudan and South: Angola). Clinical features The subconjunctival migration of an adult worm is pathognomonic of Loa loa infection. Localised subcutaneous swellings, allergic in origin, transient (several hours or days), painless, non-pitting, appearing anywhere on the body, frequently the upper extremities and face, often associated with localised or generalised pruritus (« Calabar swellings »). Onset of pruritus, in the absence of other signs. Subcutaneous migration of an adult worm: pruritic, palpable red cord-like linear lesion, sinuous, advancing (1 cm/hour), disappearing rapidly with no trace a . Such migration generally arises following treatment with diethylcarbamazine, rarely spontaneously. Laboratory Detection of microfilariae in the peripheral blood (thick film, stained with Giemsa). Blood specimens should be collected between 10 am and 5 pm. Quantify microfilaraemia even if the diagnosis is certain, since treatment is determined by the intensity of the parasite load. If the thick film is positive, look for onchocerciasis in regions where onchocerciasis is coendemic (mainly in Central Africa). Treatment Antiparasitic treatment Diethylcarbamazine (DEC) is the only macrofilaricide available but is contra-indicated in: Patients with microfilaraemia > 2000 mf/ml (risk of severe encephalopathy, with poor prognosis). Patients co-infected with O. volvulus (risk of severe eye lesions). Pregnant women, infants, and patients in poor general condition. Ivermectin (and possibly albendazole) is used to reduce microfilaraemia before administration of DEC; however, ivermectin administration may trigger encephalopathy in patients with very high Loa loa microfilaraemia (> 30 000 mf/ml). Doxycycline is not indicated since Loa loa does not harbour Wolbachia. Management: 1) L. loa microfilaraemia is < 1,000-2,000 mf/ml A 28-day treatment of DEC may be started using a small dose: 6 mg