Lymphatic filariasis (LF) The distribution of LF is linked to that of its mosquito vectors (Anopheles, Culex, Aedes, etc.): W. bancrofti: sub-Saharan Africa, Madagascar, Egypt, India, South East Asia, Pacific region, South America, The Caribbean B. malayi: South East Asia, China, India, Sri Lanka B. timori: Timor 90% of LF is due to W. bancrofti and 10% to Brugia spp. Clinical features Acute recurrent inflammatory manifestations Adenolymphangitis: lymph node(s) and red, warm, tender oedema along the length of a lymphatic channel, with or without systemic signs (e.g. fever, nausea, vomiting). The inflammation may involve the lower limbs, external genitalia and breast. In men: acute inflammation of the spermatic cord (funiculitis), epididymis and testicle (epididymo-orchitis). Attacks resolve spontaneously within a week and recur regularly in patients with chronic disease. Chronic manifestations Lymphoedema: oedema of the lower extremity or external genitalia or breast, secondary to obstruction of the lymphatics by macrofilariae. The oedema is reversible initially but then becomes chronic and increasingly severe: hypertrophy of the area affected, progressive thickening of the skin (fibrous thickening with formation of creases, initially superficial, but then deep, and verrucous lesions). The final stage of lymphoedema is elephantiasis. In men: increase in volume of fluid due to accumulation within the tunica vaginalis (hydrocoele, lymphocoele, chylocoele); chronic epididymo-orchitis. Chyluria: milky or rice-water urine (disruption of a lymphatic vessel in the urinary tract). In patients parasitized by Brugia spp, genital lesions and chyluria are rare: lymphoedema is usually confined to below the knee. Laboratory Detection of microfilariae in the peripheral blood (thick film) a ; blood specimens should be collected between 9 pm and 3 am. In regions where loiasis and/or onchocerciasis are co-endemic, check for co-infection if the LF diagnosis is positive. Treatment Antiparasitic treatment Treatment is not administered during an acute attack. Doxycycline PO, when administered