Bacterial meningitis Meningitis is an acute bacterial infection of the meninges, which may affect the brain and lead to irreversible neurological damage and auditory impairment. Bacterial meningitis is a medical emergency. The treatment is based on early parenteral administration of antibiotics that penetrates well into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Empiric antibiotic therapy is administered if the pathogen cannot be identified or while waiting for laboratory results. The main bacteria responsible vary depending on age and/or context: Meningitis in a non-epidemic context Children 0 to 3 months: Children ≤ 7 days: Gram-negative bacilli (Klebsiella spp, E. coli, S. marcescens, Pseudomona spp, Salmonella spp) and group B streptococcus Children > 7 days: S. pneumoniae accounts for 50% of all bacterial meningitis L. monocytogenes is occasionally responsible for meningitis during this period. Children 3 months-5 years: S. pneumoniae, H. influenza B and N. meningitidis Children > 5 years and adults: S. pneumoniae and N. meningitidis Special conditions: Immunodepressed patients (HIV, malnourished): high percentage of Gram- negative bacilli (specially Salmonella spp) and also M. tuberculosis. Sickle cell anaemia: Salmonella spp and Staphylococcus aureus are frequent causes. Meningitis may be related to S. aureus when associated with skin infection or skull fracture. Meningitis in an epidemic context In the Sahelian region (but not exclusively, e.g. Rwanda, Angola, Brazil), during the dry season, epidemics of meningococcal meningitis (Neisseria meningitidis A or C or W135) affect children from 6 months of age, adolescents and adults. In these regions, whether during epidemics or not, all the above pathogens can be found, especially in young children. Clinical features The clinical presentation depends on the patient's age. Children over 1 year and adults Fever, severe headache, photophobia, neck stiffness Brudzinski's sign (neck flexion in a supine patient results in involuntary flexion of the knees) and Kernig's sign (attempts to extend