Pain Pain results from a variety of pathological processes. It is expressed differently by each patient depending on cultural background, age, etc. It is a subjective experience meaning that only the individual is able to assess his/her level of pain. Regular assessment of the intensity of pain is indispensable in establishing effective treatment. Clinical features Pain assessment Intensity: use a simple verbal scale in children over 5 years and adults, and NFCS or FLACC scales in children less than 5 years (see Pain evaluation scales). Pattern: sudden, intermittent, chronic; at rest, at night, on movement, during care procedures, etc. Character: burning, cramping, spasmodic, radiating, etc. Aggravating or relieving factors, etc. Clinical examination Of the organ or area where the pain is located. Specific signs of underlying disease (e.g. bone or osteoarticular pain may be caused by a vitamin C deficiency) and review of all systems. Associated signs (fever, weight loss, etc.). Synthesis The synthesis of information gathered during history taking and clinical examination allows aetiological diagnosis and orients treatment. It is important to distinguish: Nociceptive pain: it presents most often as acute pain and the cause-effect relationship is usually obvious (e.g. acute post-operative pain, burns, trauma, renal colic, etc.). The pain may be present in different forms, but neurological exam is normal. Treatment is relatively well standardized. Neuropathic pain, due to a nerve lesion (section, stretching, ischaemia): most often chronic pain. On a background of constant, more or less localized pain, such as paraesthesia or burning, there are recurrent acute attacks such as electric shock-like pain, frequently associated with disordered sensation (anaesthesia, hypo or hyperaesthesia). This type of pain is linked to viral infections directly affecting the CNS (herpes simplex, herpes zoster), neural compression by tumors, post- amputation pain, paraplegia, etc. Mixed pain (cancer, HIV) for which management requires a