Acute otitis media (AOM) Acute inflammation of the middle ear, due to viral or bacterial infection, very common in children under 3 years, but uncommon in adults. The principal causative organisms of bacterial otitis media are Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis and in older children, Streptococcus pyogenes. Clinical features Rapid onset of ear pain (in infants: crying, irritability, sleeplessness, reluctance to nurse) and ear discharge (otorrhoea) or fever. Other signs such as rhinorrhoea, cough, diarrhoea or vomiting are frequently associated, and may confuse the diagnosis, hence the necessity of examining the tympanic membranes. Otoscopy: bright red tympanic membrane (or yellowish if rupture is imminent) and presence of pus, either externalised (drainage in ear canal if the tympanic membrane is ruptured) or internalised (opaque or bulging tympanic membrane). The combination of these signs with ear pain or fever confirms the diagnosis of AOM. Note: The following otoscopic findings are not sufficient to make the diagnosis of AOM: A red tympanic membrane alone, with no evidence of bulging or perforation, is suggestive of viral otitis in a context of upper respiratory tract infection, or may be due to prolonged crying in children or high fever. The presence of air bubbles or fluid behind an intact tympanic membrane, in the absence of signs and symptoms of acute infection, is suggestive of otitis media with effusion (OME). Complications, particularly in high-risk children (malnutrition, immunodeficiency, ear malformation) include chronic suppurative otitis media, and rarely, mastoiditis, brain abscess or meningitis. Treatment In all cases: Treatment of fever and pain: paracetamol PO (Chapter 1). Ear irrigation is contra-indicated if the tympanic membrane is ruptured, or when the tympanic membrane cannot be fully visualised. Ear drops are not indicated. Indications for antibiotic therapy: Antibiotics are prescribed in children less than 2 years, children whose assessment suggests severe