Supportive care Hydration and nutrition: if child is breastfeeding, continue; ensure adequate fluid and calorie intake, give frequent small feedings including after coughing bouts and post-tussive vomiting; some patients may require nasogastric tube feeding or IV maintenance fluids; be aware that NG tube placement might provoke paroxysmal coughing, so it should be inserted by experienced medical staff with minimal manipulation. If weight loss occurred during illness, consider food supplements for several weeks during convalescent stage when child is able to eat comfortably. Respiratory measures Place the patient in a semi-reclining position (± 30°). In case of apnoea, stimulate the patient, but be prepared to ventilate if necessary (keep bag and mask accessible). Administer oxygen if SpO < 92%, for severe respiratory distress, or for recurrent apnoea. Perform gentle 2 oropharyngeal suctioning if required but avoid deep suctioning (may provoke paroxysmal coughing). For children treated as outpatients, teach the parents about signs that require immediate medical attention (e.g. respiratory difficulty, apnoea, cyanosis, increasing fever, seizures or impaired consciousness, dehydration, feeding difficulty). Contacts Post-exposure prophylaxis (same antibiotic treatment as for suspect cases) is recommended, regardless of vaccination status, for: Asymptomatic close contacts (having face-to-face exposure or direct contact with oral, nasal, or other respiratory secretions [7] ) of a person with suspected pertussis within 3 weeks of onset of paroxysmal cough Asymptomatic exposed people at high risk of complications or who will come into contact with people at high risk [4] [8] : pregnant women in the third trimester (risk to neonate), infants under 1 year, people with immunodepression, moderate to severe asthma, and consider for people with other underlying respiratory conditions and adults ≥ 65 years. Isolation of asymptomatic contacts is not necessary. Symptomatic contacts should be treated as suspected pertussis. Assess whether the person is up-to-date with pertussis vaccination according